

Salsalate Improves Glycemia in Overweight Persons With Diabetes Risk Factors of
Stable Statin-Treated Cardiovascular Disease: a 30-month Randomized
Placebo-Controlled Trial.



Obesity related sub-acute chronic inflammation contributes to type 2 diabetes and
atherosclerosis (1,2) . Multiple studies target inflammation to reduce
dysglycemia and/or coronary heart disease (CHD) using diverse anti-inflammatory
approaches. Several show salsalate, a pro-drug of salicylate, improves glycemia
in type 2 diabetes, obesity, or impaired glucose tolerance. Durability of
glycemic efficacy and safety of salsalate remains less well understood.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.



Salsalate treatment following traumatic brain injury reduces inflammation and
promotes a neuroprotective and neurogenic transcriptional response with
concomitant functional recovery.


Neuroinflammation plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of traumatic brain
injury (TBI). TBI induces rapid activation of astrocytes and microglia,
infiltration of peripheral leukocytes, and secretion of inflammatory cytokines.
In the context of modest or severe TBI, such inflammation contributes to tissue
destruction and permanent brain damage. However, it is clear that the
inflammatory response is also necessary to promote post-injury healing. To date, 
anti-inflammatory therapies, including the broad class of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), have met with little success in treatment of
TBI, perhaps because these drugs have inhibited both the tissue-damaging and
repair-promoting aspects of the inflammatory response, or because inhibition of
inflammation alone is insufficient to yield therapeutic benefit. Salsalate is an 
unacetylated salicylate with long history of use in limiting inflammation. This
drug is known to block activation of NF-κB, and recent data suggest that
salsalate has a number of additional biological activities, which may also
contribute to its efficacy in treatment of human disease. Here, we show that
salsalate potently blocks pro-inflammatory gene expression and nitrite secretion 
by microglia in vitro. Using the controlled cortical impact (CCI) model in mice, 
we find that salsalate has a broad anti-inflammatory effect on in vivo
TBI-induced gene expression, when administered post-injury. Interestingly,
salsalate also elevates expression of genes associated with neuroprotection and
neurogenesis, including the neuropeptides, oxytocin and thyrotropin releasing
hormone. Histological analysis reveals salsalate-dependent decreases in numbers
and activation-associated morphological changes in microglia/macrophages,
proximal to the injury site. Flow cytometry data show that salsalate changes the 
kinetics of CCI-induced accumulation of various populations of CD11b-positive
myeloid cells in the injured brain. Behavioral assays demonstrate that salsalate 
treatment promotes significant recovery of function following CCI. These
pre-clinical data suggest that salsalate may show promise as a TBI therapy with a
multifactorial mechanism of action to enhance functional recovery.

Published by Elsevier Inc.




Salsalate treatment for prediabetes: a therapeutic alternative?


Effect of Treatment with Salsalate, Menhaden Oil, Combination of Salsalate and
Menhaden Oil, or Resolvin D1 of C57Bl/6J Type 1 Diabetic Mouse on Neuropathic
Endpoints.).


Aims. In this study a streptozotocin induced type 1 diabetes mouse model was used
to assess the effectiveness of salsalate, menhaden oil, the combination of
salsalate and menhaden oil, or resolvin D1 on neuropathic endpoints. Materials
and Methods. Changes in body weight, blood glucose, serum markers for
triglycerides, free fatty acids, cholesterol, and resolvin D1, motor and sensory 
nerve conduction velocities and thermal sensitivity were assessed, as well as
performing in vivo confocal microscopy of subepithelial corneal nerves and
immunohistochemistry of nerves in the cornea and foot pad. Results. Diabetic
animals failed to gain weight and had elevated blood glucose levels. Diabetic
mice had slowed nerve conduction velocity, reduced innervation of the foot pad
and cornea subepithelial and epithelial layers, and reduced thermal sensitivity. 
Monotherapy treatment with salsalate, menhaden oil, and resolvin D1 reduced the
pathological signs of diabetic neuropathy. The combination of salsalate and
menhaden oil also reduced signs of pathology and generated elevated plasma levels
of resolvin D1 compared to other groups. Conclusions. Additional studies are
needed to determine whether the combination of salsalate and menhaden oil may be 
more efficacious than monotherapy alone for the treatment of diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy.




Salsalate (Salicylate) Uncouples Mitochondria, Improves Glucose Homeostasis, and 
Reduces Liver Lipids Independent of AMPK-β1.




Salsalate is a prodrug of salicylate that lowers blood glucose in patients with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) and reduces nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in
animal models; however, the mechanism mediating these effects is unclear.
Salicylate directly activates AMPK via the β1 subunit, but whether salsalate
requires AMPK-β1 to improve T2D and NAFLD has not been examined. Therefore,
wild-type (WT) and AMPK-β1-knockout (AMPK-β1KO) mice were treated with a
salsalate dose resulting in clinically relevant serum salicylate concentrations
(∼1 mmol/L). Salsalate treatment increased VO2, lowered fasting glucose, improved
glucose tolerance, and led to an ∼55% reduction in liver lipid content. These
effects were observed in both WT and AMPK-β1KO mice. To explain these
AMPK-independent effects, we found that salicylate increases
oligomycin-insensitive respiration (state 4o) and directly increases
mitochondrial proton conductance at clinical concentrations. This uncoupling
effect is tightly correlated with the suppression of de novo lipogenesis.
Salicylate is also able to stimulate brown adipose tissue respiration independent
of uncoupling protein 1. These data indicate that the primary mechanism by which 
salsalate improves glucose homeostasis and NAFLD is via salicylate-driven
mitochondrial uncoupling.



Conflict of interest statement: Duality of Interest. No potential conflicts of
interest relevant to this article were reported.



Informative Neutral Studies Matter-Why the Targeting Inflammation With Salsalate 
in Cardiovascular Disease (TINSAL-CVD) Trial Deserves Our Attention.

Ridker PM(1).






Effect of Targeting Inflammation With Salsalate: The TINSAL-CVD Randomized
Clinical Trial on Progression of Coronary Plaque in Overweight and Obese Patients
Using Statins.

Hauser TH(1), Salastekar N(2), Schaefer EJ(3), Desai T(4), Goldfine HL(5), Fowler
KM(6), Weber GM(7), Welty F(1), Clouse M(8), Shoelson SE(4), Goldfine AB(9);
Targeting Inflammation Using Salsalate in Cardiovascular Disease (TINSAL-CVD)
Study Team.



IMPORTANCE: Inflammation may contribute to pathological associations among
obesity, diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether targeting inflammation using salsalate compared
with placebo reduces progression of noncalcified coronary artery plaque.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In the Targeting Inflammation Using Salsalate 
in Cardiovascular Disease (TINSAL-CVD) trial participants were randomly assigned 
between September 23, 2008, and July 5, 2012, to 30 months of salsalate or
placebo in addition to standard, guideline-based therapies. Randomization was
computerized and centrally allocated, with patients, health care professionals,
and researchers masked to treatment assignment. Participants were overweight and 
obese statin-using patients with established, stable coronary heart disease.
INTERVENTIONS: Salsalate (3.5 g/d) or placebo orally over 30 months.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was progression of noncalcified
coronary artery plaque assessed by multidetector computed tomographic
angiography. Secondary outcomes were other measures of safety and efficacy.
RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-seven participants were randomized to salsalate
(n = 129) or placebo (n = 128). Their mean (SD) age was 60.8 (7.0) years, and
salsalate group and 101 in the placebo group) completed the study. Compared with 
baseline, there was no increase in noncalcified plaque volume in the
placebo-treated patients and no difference in change between the salsalate and
placebo groups (mean difference, -1 mm3; 95% CI, -11 to 9 mm3; P = .87).
Salsalate treatment decreased total white blood cell, lymphocyte, monocyte, and
neutrophil counts and increased adiponectin levels without change in C-reactive
protein levels. Fasting glucose, triglycerides, uric acid, and bilirubin levels
were decreased in the salsalate group compared with the placebo group, while
hemoglobin levels were increased. Urinary albumin levels increased, with tinnitus
and atrial arrhythmias more common, in the salsalate group compared with the
placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Salsalate when added to current therapies that include
a statin does not reduce progression of noncalcified coronary plaque volume
assessed by multidetector computed tomographic angiography in statin-using
patients with established, stable coronary heart disease. The absence of
progression of noncalcified plaque volume in the placebo group may limit
interpretation of the trial results.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00624923.




Renal Toxicity Associated with Salsalate in Elderly Adults with Anemia.





Salsalate-induced changes in lipid, lipoprotein, and apoprotein concentrations in
overweight or obese, insulin-resistant, nondiabetic individuals.



BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Although salsalate administration consistently lowers
plasma triglyceride concentrations in patients with type II diabetes,
prediabetes, and/or insulin resistance, changes in low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C) concentrations have been inconsistent; varying from no change
to a significant increase. To evaluate the clinical relevance of this discordance
in more detail, we directly measured LDL-C and obtained a comprehensive
assessment of changes in lipid, lipoprotein, and apoprotein concentrations
associated with salsalate use in insulin-resistant individuals, overweight or
obese, but without diabetes, using vertical auto profile method.
METHODS: A single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study was performed in
volunteers who were overweight or obese, without diabetes, and insulin resistant 
on the basis of their steady-state plasma glucose concentration during an insulin
suppression test. Participants were randomized 2:1 to receive salsalate 3.5 g/d
(n = 27) or placebo (n = 14) for 4 weeks. Comprehensive lipid, lipoprotein, and
apoprotein analysis by vertical auto profile was obtained after an overnight
fast, before and after study intervention.
RESULTS: There was no change in directly measured LDL-C concentration in
salsalate-treated individuals. However, salsalate administration was associated
with various changes considered to decrease atherogenicity; including decreases
in triglyceride and total very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C)
concentrations, a shift from small denser LDL lipoproteins toward larger, more
buoyant LDL particles, decreases in VLDL(1+2)-C and LDL(4)-C, and nonsignificant 
decreases in non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and apolipoprotein B. No
significant changes occurred in the placebo-treated group.
CONCLUSIONS: Atherogenicity of the lipid, lipoprotein, and apoprotein profile of 
insulin-resistant individuals who were overweight or obese improved significantly
in association with salsalate treatment. The clinical importance of this finding 
awaits further study.

Copyright © 2015 National Lipid Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.




Salsalate attenuates diet induced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in mice by
decreasing lipogenic and inflammatory processes.

Liang W(1,)(2), Verschuren L(3), Mulder P(1), van der Hoorn JW(1), Verheij J(4), 
van Dam AD(2), Boon MR(2), Princen HM(1), Havekes LM(1,)(2), Kleemann R(1), van
den Hoek AM(1).



BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Salsalate (salicylsalicylic acid) is an anti-inflammatory
drug that was recently found to exert beneficial metabolic effects on glucose and
lipid metabolism. Although its utility in the prevention and management of a wide
range of vascular disorders, including type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome has
been suggested before, the potential of salsalate to protect against
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) remains unclear. The aim of the present
study was therefore to ascertain the effects of salsalate on the development of
NASH.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Transgenic APOE*3Leiden.CETP mice were fed a high-fat and 
high-cholesterol diet with or without salsalate for 12 and 20 weeks. The effects 
on body weight, plasma biochemical variables, liver histology and hepatic gene
expression were assessed.
KEY RESULTS: Salsalate prevented weight gain, improved dyslipidemia and insulin
resistance and ameliorated diet-induced NASH, as shown by decreased hepatic
microvesicular and macrovesicular steatosis, reduced hepatic inflammation and
reduced development of fibrosis. Salsalate affected lipid metabolism by
increasing β-oxidation and decreasing lipogenesis, as shown by the activation of 
PPAR-α, PPAR-γ co-activator 1β, RXR-α and inhibition of genes controlled by the
transcription factor MLXIPL/ChREBP. Inflammation was reduced by down-regulation
of the NF-κB pathway, and fibrosis development was prevented by down-regulation
of TGF-β signalling.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Salsalate exerted a preventive effect on the
development of NASH and progression to fibrosis. These data suggest a clinical
application of salsalate in preventing NASH.





Salsalate has no effect on insulin secretion but decreases insulin clearance: a
randomized, placebo-controlled trial in subjects without diabetes.

Penesova A(1), Koska J, Ortega E, Bunt JC, Bogardus C, de Courten B.



To elucidate whether increased insulin concentration after salsalate treatment
(3 g/day for 7 days) is attributable to an increased insulin secretion rate (ISR)
or to reduced metabolic clearance of endogenous insulin (MCI) during stepped
glucose infusion (SGI). The analysis was performed in obese subjects who
participated in a randomized double-blind, parallel, placebo-controlled clinical 
trial. A total of 27 participants (16 on salsalate, 11 on placebo) completed
baseline and follow-up SGI. During SGI in the salsalate group, C-peptide
concentrations were reduced by 11%, while plasma insulin concentrations were
increased by 30%, corresponding to a 30% reduction in MCI (p < 0.0001). At molar 
increments of glucose, insulin concentrations were increased by 27% (p = 0.02),
but ISR was unchanged. Salsalate did not alter insulin secretion, but lowered
MCI, indicating that a reduction in insulin clearance is the principal mechanism 
for increased insulin levels after salsalate administration.




Feb 3.

Salsalate treatment improves glycemia without altering adipose tissue in
nondiabetic obese hispanics.

Alderete TL(1), Sattler FR, Richey JM, Allayee H, Mittelman SD, Sheng X, Tucci J,
Gyllenhammer LE, Grant EG, Goran MI.



OBJECTIVE: Salsalate treatment has well-known effects on improving glycemia, and 
the objective of this study was to examine whether the mechanism of this effect
was related to changes in adipose tissue.
METHODS: A randomized double-blind and placebo-controlled trial in obese
Hispanics (18-35 years) was conducted. The intervention consisted of 4 g day(-1) 
of salsalate (n = 11) versus placebo (n = 13) for 4 weeks. Outcome measures
included glycemia, adiposity, ectopic fat, and adipose tissue gene expression and
inflammation.
RESULTS: In those receiving salsalate, plasma fasting glucose decreased by 3.4%
(P < 0.01), free fatty acids decreased by 42.5% (P = 0.06), and adiponectin
increased by 27.7% (P < 0.01). Salsalate increased insulin AUC by 38% (P = 0.01) 
and HOMA-B by 47.2% (P < 0.01) while estimates of insulin sensitivity/resistance 
were unaffected. These metabolic improvements occurred without changes in total, 
abdominal, visceral, or liver fat. Plasma markers of inflammation/immune
activation were unchanged following salsalate. Salsalate had no effects on
adipose tissue including adipocyte size, presence of crown-like structures, or
gene expression of adipokines, immune cell markers, or cytokines downstream of
NF-κB with the exception of downregulation of IL-1β (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that metabolic improvements in response to
salsalate occurred without alterations in adiposity, ectopic fat, or adipose
tissue gene expression and inflammation.





Salsalate activates brown adipose tissue in mice.





Salsalate improves glucose intolerance and dyslipidemia in type 2 diabetes
patients, but the mechanism is still unknown. The aim of the current study was to
unravel the molecular mechanisms involved in these beneficial metabolic effects
of salsalate by treating mice with salsalate during and after development of
high-fat diet-induced obesity. We found that salsalate attenuated and reversed
high-fat diet-induced weight gain, in particular fat mass accumulation, improved 
glucose tolerance, and lowered plasma triglyceride levels. Mechanistically,
salsalate selectively promoted the uptake of fatty acids from glycerol
tri[(3)H]oleate-labeled lipoprotein-like emulsion particles by brown adipose
tissue (BAT), decreased the intracellular lipid content in BAT, and increased
rectal temperature, all pointing to more active BAT. The treatment of
differentiated T37i brown adipocytes with salsalate increased uncoupled
respiration. Moreover, salsalate upregulated Ucp1 expression and enhanced
glycerol release, a dual effect that was abolished by the inhibition of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). In conclusion, salsalate activates BAT,
presumably by directly activating brown adipocytes via the PKA pathway,
suggesting a novel mechanism that may explain its beneficial metabolic effects in
type 2 diabetes patients.

as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.




Salsalate, an old, inexpensive drug with potential new indications: a review of
the evidence from 3 recent studies.



BACKGROUND: Diabetes is a well-known growing epidemic, but prediabetes is
increasing at an even greater rate. Lifestyle changes are effective tools to
prevent the progression of prediabetes to diabetes, yet many people are unable to
follow such changes. Salsalate has been suggested as a possible treatment for
diabetes as early as 1876 and as recently as in a 2013 study.
OBJECTIVE: To review the recently published evidence about the potential
therapeutic benefits of the old drug salsalate for individuals who meet the
criteria of having prediabetes.
DISCUSSION: With the rising incidence of obesity and prediabetes, it has become
prudent to look for more therapeutic options. Salsalate belongs to the salicylate
drug class, which has been shown to inhibit I-κB kinase, thereby inhibiting the
nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) cascade and decreasing the production of inflammatory
cytokines, as well as decreasing insulin resistance. Recent short-term clinical
trials have shown that 3 g to 4.5 g of salicylate therapy daily has the ability
to lower insulin resistance and to reduce the levels of glucose, triglycerides,
and free fatty acid concentrations through regulation of the I-κB kinase
beta/NF-κB pathway, with few if any side effects. However, the effectiveness of
salsalate as a treatment option for prediabetes is largely unrecognized. This
article summarizes the current evidence from 3 studies of salsalate therapy in
the setting of the prediabetic population and presents the case for its use in
this population.
CONCLUSION: As shown in this review, salsalate therapy at the dose of 3 g to 4.5 
g daily can lower insulin resistance and reduce the levels of glucose,
triglycerides, and free fatty acid concentrations with minimal side effects. This
inexpensive medication could be a useful option in the treatment of prediabetes. 
Larger clinical trials are needed, but the data are encouraging and should lay
the foundation for further investigation and grant funding.




eCollection 2014.

Diabetes disease progression in Goto-Kakizaki rats: effects of salsalate
treatment.



This study investigates the antidiabetic effects of salsalate on disease
progression of diabetes in non-obese diabetic Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats, an
experimental model of type 2 diabetes. Salsalate was formulated in rat chow
(1,000 ppm) and used to feed rats from 5 to 21 weeks of age. At 5 weeks of age,
GK and Wistar (WIS) control rats were subdivided into four groups, each composed 
of six rats: GK rats with standard diet (GK-C); GK rats with salsalate-containing
diet (GK-S); WIS rats with standard diet (WIS-C); and WIS rats with
salsalate-containing diet (WIS-S). The GK-C rats (167.2±11.6 mg/dL) showed higher
blood glucose concentrations than WIS-C rats (133.7±4.9 mg/dL, P<0.001) at the
beginning of the experiment, and had substantially elevated blood glucose from an
age of 15 weeks until sacrifice at 21 weeks (341.0±133.6 mg/dL). The GK-S rats
showed an almost flat profile of blood glucose from 4 weeks (165.1±11.0 mg/dL)
until sacrifice at 21 weeks of age (203.7±22.2 mg/dL). While this difference in
blood glucose between 4 and 21 weeks in GK-S animals was significant, blood
glucose at 21 weeks was significantly lower in GK-S compared to GK-C animals. At 
sacrifice, salsalate decreased plasma insulin (GK-S =1.0±0.3; GK-C =2.0±0.3
ng/mL, P<0.001) and increased plasma adiponectin concentrations (GK-S =15.9±0.7; 
GK-C =9.7±2.0 μg/mL, P<0.001). Salsalate also lowered total cholesterol in GK-S
rats (96.1±8.5 mg/dL) compared with GK-C rats (128.0±11.4 mg/dL, P<0.001).
Inflammation-related genes (Ifit1 and Iigp1) exhibited much higher mRNA
expression in GK-C rats than WIS-C rats in liver, adipose, and muscle tissues,
while salsalate decreased the Ifit1 and Iigp1 mRNA only in adipose tissue. These 
results suggest that salsalate acts to both increase adiponectin and decrease
adipose tissue-based inflammation while preventing type 2 diabetes disease
progression in GK rats.




The effect of salsalate on biochemical factors and endothelial dysfunction of
prediabetic patients: A randomized clinical trial.



BACKGROUND: The beneficial effect of using nonacetylated salicylates such as
salsalate on decreasing the speed of diabetes progression is a controversial
issue. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of salsalate on
metabolic-syndrome-associated parameters as well as the endothelial function of
diabetic and impaired glucose tolerance patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients were collected from Isfahan endocrinology
research center referrals. Patients with impaired glucose tolerance diagnosis or 
newly diagnosed diabetes were enrolled in the study. Patients were randomized to 
receive 1.5 g salsalate (2 × 750 mg) BID or placebo twice a day for 3 months.
After the mentioned period, all patients were recalled and complete examination
was done; blood samples for biochemistry measurements were drawn (for measuring
FBS, post prandial glucose, HbA1C, Total cholesterol, HDL, TG, LDL) and forearm
flow-mediated dilation (FMD) was performed.
RESULTS: Forty patients were enrolled, 32 patients (80%) were female. Mean age of
patients was 47.15 ± 6.67 years. FBS (fasting blood sugar) was shown to be
significantly different between intervention and control subjects before or after
treatment. FMD increased significantly in the intervention group (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: The study showed that salsalate decreased FBS levels of patients. It 
may also improve endothelial function as FMD increased significantly in the
intervention group.





Effect of salsalate on insulin action, secretion, and clearance in nondiabetic,
insulin-resistant individuals: a randomized, placebo-controlled study.

Kim SH(1), Liu A(2), Ariel D(2), Abbasi F(2), Lamendola C(2), Grove K(2), Tomasso
V(2), Ochoa H(2), Reaven G(2).



OBJECTIVE: Salsalate treatment has been shown to improve glucose homeostasis, but
the mechanism remains unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect
of salsalate treatment on insulin action, secretion, and clearance rate in
nondiabetic individuals with insulin resistance.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This was a randomized (2:1), single-blind,
placebo-controlled study of salsalate (3.5 g daily for 4 weeks) in nondiabetic
individuals with insulin resistance. All individuals had measurement of glucose
tolerance (75-g oral glucose tolerance test), steady-state plasma glucose (SSPG; 
insulin suppression test), and insulin secretion and clearance rate
(graded-glucose infusion test) before and after treatment.
RESULTS: Forty-one individuals were randomized to salsalate (n = 27) and placebo 
(n = 14). One individual from each group discontinued the study. Salsalate
improved fasting (% mean change -7% [95% CI -10 to -14] vs. 1% [-3 to 5], P =
Salsalate also lowered fasting triglyceride concentration (-25% [-34 to -15] vs. 
-6% [-26 to 14], P = 0.04). Salsalate had no effect on SSPG concentration or
insulin secretion rate but significantly decreased insulin clearance rate
compared with placebo (-23% [-30 to -16] vs. 3% [-10 to 15], P < 0.001).
Salsalate was well tolerated, but four individuals needed a dose reduction due to
symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Salsalate treatment in nondiabetic, insulin-resistant individuals
improved fasting, but not postprandial, glucose and triglyceride concentration.
These improvements were associated with a decrease in insulin clearance rate
without change in insulin action or insulin secretion.





Response to comment on Goldfine et al. Targeting inflammation using salsalate in 
patients with type 2 diabetes: effects on flow-mediated dilation (TINSAL-FMD).
Diabetes care 2013;36:4132-4139.

Goldfine AB(1), Jablonski KA, Shoelson SE, Creager MA; TINSAL-FMD (Targeting
Inflammation Using Salsalate in Type 2 Diabetes–Flow-Mediated Dilation) Ancillary
Study Team.






Targeting inflammation using salsalate in patients
with type 2 diabetes: effects on flow-mediated dilation (TINSAL-FMD). Diabetes
care 2013;36:4132-4139.





The effect of salsalate therapy on endothelial function in a broad range of
subjects.





BACKGROUND: Inflammation is fundamental to the development of atherosclerosis. We
examined the effect of anti-inflammatory doses of salicylate on
endothelium-dependent vasodilation, a biomarker of cardiovascular risk, in a
broad range of subjects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
crossover trial evaluating the effects of 4 weeks of high-dose salsalate
(disalicylate) therapy on endothelium-dependent flow-mediated and
endothelium-independent vasodilation. Fifty-eight subjects, including 17 with
metabolic syndrome, 13 with atherosclerosis, and 28 healthy controls, were
studied. Among all subjects, endothelium-dependent flow-mediated vasodilation
decreased after salsalate compared with placebo therapy (P=0.01), whereas
nitroglycerin-mediated, endothelium-independent vasodilation was unchanged
(P=0.97). Endothelium-dependent flow-mediated vasodilation after salsalate
therapy was impaired compared with placebo therapy in subjects with therapeutic
salicylate levels (n=31, P<0.02) but not in subjects with subtherapeutic levels
(P>0.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Salsalate therapy, particularly when therapeutic salicylate levels
are achieved, impairs endothelium-dependent vasodilation in a broad range of
subjects. These data raise concern about the possible deleterious effects of
anti-inflammatory doses of salsalate on cardiovascular risk.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION URL: www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique Identifiers:
NCT00760019 and NCT00762827.




The impact of salsalate treatment on serum levels of advanced glycation end
products in type 2 diabetes.



OBJECTIVE Salsalate is a nonacetylated salicylate that lowers glucose levels in
people with type 2 diabetes (T2D). Here we examined whether salsalate also
lowered serum-protein-bound levels of early and advanced glycation end products
(AGEs) that have been implicated in diabetic vascular complications. RESEARCH
DESIGN AND METHODS Participants were from the Targeting Inflammation Using
Salsalate for Type 2 Diabetes (TINSAL-T2D) study, which examined the impact of
salsalate treatment on hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) and a wide variety of other
parameters. One hundred eighteen participants received salsalate, 3.5 g/day for
fructoselysine [measured as furosine]) and AGE levels (glyoxal and methylglyoxal 
hydroimidazolones [G-(1)H, MG-(1)H], carboxymethyllysine [CML],
carboxyethyllysine [CEL], pentosidine) were measured in patient serum samples.
RESULTS Forty-eight weeks of salsalate treatment lowered levels of HbA1c and
serum furosine (P < 0.001) and CML compared with placebo. The AGEs CEL and G-(1)H
and MG-(1)H levels were unchanged, whereas pentosidine levels increased more than
twofold (P < 0.001). Among salsalate users, increases in adiponectin levels were 
associated with lower HbA1c levels during follow-up (P < 0.001). Changes in renal
and inflammation factor levels were not associated with changes in levels of
early or late glycation factors. Pentosidine level changes were unrelated to
changes in levels of renal function, inflammation, or cytokines. CONCLUSIONS
Salsalate therapy was associated with a reduction in early but not late glycation
end products. There was a paradoxical increase in serum pentosidine levels
suggestive of an increase in oxidative stress or decreased clearance of
pentosidine precursor.




Targeting inflammation using salsalate in patients with type 2 diabetes: effects 
on flow-mediated dilation (TINSAL-FMD).

Goldfine AB(1), Buck JS, Desouza C, Fonseca V, Chen YD, Shoelson SE, Jablonski
KA, Creager MA; TINSAL-FMD (Targeting Inflammation Using Salsalate in Type 2
Diabetes–Flow-Mediated Dilation) Ancillary Study Team.

Collaborators: Aroda V, Brook R, Creager MA, Desouza C, Fonseca V, Goldfine AB,
Jablonski KA, Mather K, McNeal CJ, Shoelson SE, Umpierrez G.



OBJECTIVE: To test whether inhibiting inflammation with salsalate improves
endothelial function in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We conducted an ancillary study to the National
Institutes of Health-sponsored, multicenter, randomized, double-masked,
placebo-controlled trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of salsalate in
targeting inflammation to improve glycemia in patients with T2D. Flow-mediated,
endothelium-dependent dilation (FMD) and endothelium-independent,
nitroglycerin-mediated dilation (NMD) of the brachial artery were assessed at
baseline and 3 and 6 months following randomization to either salsalate 3.5 g/day
or placebo. The primary end point was change in FMD at 6 months.
RESULTS: A total of 88 participants were enrolled in the study, and data after
randomization were available for 75. Patients in the treatment and control groups
had similar ages (56 years), BMI (33 kg/m(2)), sex (64% male), ethnicity, current
treatment, and baseline HbA1c (7.7% [61 mmol/mol]). In patients treated with
salsalate versus placebo, HbA1c was reduced by 0.46% (5.0 mmol/mol; P < 0.001),
fasting glucose by 16.1 mg/dL (P < 0.001), and white blood cell count by 430
cells/µL (P < 0.02). There was no difference in the mean change in either FMD
(0.70% [95% CI -0.86 to 2.25%]; P = 0.38) or NMD (-0.59% [95% CI -2.70 to 1.51%];
P = 0.57) between the groups treated with salsalate and placebo at 6 months.
Total and LDL cholesterol were 11 and 16 mg/dL higher, respectively, and urinary 
albumin was 2.0 µg/mg creatinine higher in the patients treated with salsalate
compared with those treated with placebo (all P < 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: Salsalate does not change FMD in peripheral conduit arteries in
patients with T2D despite lowering HbA1c. This finding suggests that salsalate
does not have an effect on vascular inflammation, inflammation does not cause
endothelial dysfunction in T2D, or confounding effects of salsalate mitigate
favorable effects on endothelial function.




Salsalate and adiponectin ameliorate hepatic steatosis by inhibition of the
hepatokine fetuin-A.





Fetuin-A was recently identified as a novel hepatokine which is associated with
obesity, insulin resistance and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Salsalate, a
prodrug of salicylate with an anti-inflammatory effect and lower side effect
profile, significantly lowers glucose and triglyceride levels, and increased
adiponectin concentrations in randomized clinical trials. In this study, we
examined the effects and regulatory mechanisms of salsalate and full
length-adiponectin (fAd) on fetuin-A expression, steatosis and lipid metabolism
in palmitate-treated HepG2 cells. Incubation of hepatocytes with palmitate
significantly increased fetuin-A and SREBP-1c expression which lead to steatosis 
and knock-down of fetuin-A by siRNA restored these changes. Salsalate
significantly down-regulated palmitate-induced fetuin-A mRNA expression and
secretion in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Inhibition of palmitate-induced
fetuin-A by salsalate was mediated by AMPK-mediated reduction of NFκB activity,
which was blocked by AMPK siRNA or an inhibitor of AMPK. Salsalate attenuated the
excessive steatosis by palmitate through SREBP-1c regulation in hepatocytes.
Furthermore, fAd also showed suppression of palmitate-induced fetuin-A through
the AMPK pathway and improvement of steatosis accompanied by restoration of
SREBP-1c, PAPR-α and CD36. In preliminary in vivo experiments, salsalate
treatment inhibited high fat diet (HFD)-induced steatosis as well as fetuin-A
mRNA and protein expression in SD rats. In conclusion, salsalate and fAd improved
palmitate-induced steatosis and impairment of lipid metabolism in hepatocytes via
fetuin-A inhibition through the AMPK-NFκB pathway.



Salsalate and Adiponectin Improve Palmitate-Induced Insulin Resistance via
Inhibition of Selenoprotein P through the AMPK-FOXO1α Pathway.




Selenoprotein P (SeP) was recently identified as a hepatokine that induces
insulin resistance (IR) in rodents and humans. Recent clinical trials have shown 
that salsalate, a prodrug of salicylate, significantly lowers blood glucose
levels and increases adiponectin concentrations. We examined the effects of
salsalate and full length-adiponectin (fAd) on the expression of SeP under
hyperlipidemic conditions and explored their regulatory mechanism on SeP. In
palmitate-treated HepG2 cells as well as high fat diet (HFD)-fed male Spraque
Dawley (SD) rats and male db/db mice, SeP expression and its regulatory pathway, 
including AMPK-FOXO1α, were evaluated after administration of salsalate and
salicylate. Palmitate treatment significantly increased SeP expression and
aggravated IR, while knock-down of SeP by siRNA restored these changes in HepG2
cells. Palmitate-induced SeP expression was inhibited by both salsalate and
salicylate, which was mediated by AMPK activation, and was blocked by AMPK siRNA 
or an inhibitor of AMPK. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and electrophoretic
mobility shift (EMSA) assay showed that salsalate suppressed SeP expression by
AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of FOXO1α. Moreover, fAd also reduced
palmitate-induced SeP expression through the activation of AMPK, which results in
improved IR. Both salsalate and salicylate treatment significantly improved
glucose intolerance and insulin sensitivity, accompanied by reduced SeP mRNA and 
protein expression in HFD-fed rats and db/db mice, respectively. Taken together, 
we found that salsalate and adiponectin ameliorated palmitate-induced IR in
hepatocytes via SeP inhibition through the AMPK-FOXO1α pathway. The regulation of
SeP might be a novel mechanism mediating the anti-diabetic effects of salsalate
and adiponectin.









Salicylate (salsalate) in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial.





BACKGROUND: Short-duration studies show that salsalate improves glycemia in type 
OBJECTIVE: To assess 1-year efficacy and safety of salsalate in T2DM.
DESIGN: Placebo-controlled, parallel trial; computerized randomization and
centralized allocation, with patients, providers, and researchers blinded to
assignment. (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00799643).
SETTING: 3 private practices and 18 academic centers in the United States.
PATIENTS: Persons aged 18 to 75 years with fasting glucose levels of 12.5 mmol/L 
or less (≤225 mg/dL) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels of 7.0% to 9.5% who were
treated for diabetes.
INTERVENTION: 286 participants were randomly assigned (between January 2009 and
July 2011) to 48 weeks of placebo (n = 140) or salsalate, 3.5 g/d (n = 146), in
addition to current therapies, and 283 participants were analyzed (placebo, n =
MEASUREMENTS: Change in hemoglobin A1c level (primary outcome) and safety and
efficacy measures.
RESULTS: The mean HbA1c level over 48 weeks was 0.37% lower in the salsalate
group than in the placebo group (95% CI, -0.53% to -0.21%; P < 0.001). Glycemia
improved despite more reductions in concomitant diabetes medications in salsalate
recipients than in placebo recipients. Lower circulating leukocyte, neutrophil,
and lymphocyte counts show the anti-inflammatory effects of salsalate.
Adiponectin and hematocrit levels increased more and fasting glucose, uric acid, 
and triglyceride levels decreased with salsalate, but weight and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels also increased. Urinary albumin levels increased
but reversed on discontinuation; estimated glomerular filtration rates were
unchanged.
LIMITATION: Trial duration and number of patients studied were insufficient to
determine long-term risk-benefit of salsalate in T2DM.
CONCLUSION: Salsalate improves glycemia in patients with T2DM and decreases
inflammatory mediators. Continued evaluation of mixed cardiorenal signals is
warranted.




Open-label salsalate for the treatment of pre-diabetes in people with
schizophrenia.

Keller WR, Fischer BA, McMahon RP, Meyer W, Buchanan RW.




A randomised trial of salsalate for insulin resistance and cardiovascular risk
factors in persons with abnormal glucose tolerance.



AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Chronic sub-acute inflammation contributes to the pathogenesis
of type 2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. High doses of salicylate 
reduce inflammation, glucose and triacylglycerols, and may improve insulin
sensitivity, suggesting therapeutic potential in impaired fasting glucose and/or 
impaired glucose tolerance. This trial aimed to evaluate the effect of salsalate 
vs placebo on insulin resistance and glycaemia in impaired fasting glucose and/or
impaired glucose tolerance.
METHODS: We conducted a 12 week, two-centre, randomised, placebo-controlled study
to evaluate the effect of salsalate (up to 4 g/day) vs placebo on systemic
glucose disposal. Secondary objectives included treatment effects on glycaemia,
inflammation and cardiovascular risk factors. Seventy-eight participants with
impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance from two VA healthcare
systems were enrolled. Randomisation assignment was provided by the coordinating 
center directly to site pharmacists, and participants and research staff were
blinded to treatment assignment.
RESULTS: Seventy-one individuals were randomised to placebo (n = 36) or salsalate
(n = 35). Glucose disposal did not change in either group (salsalate 1% [95% CI
-39%, 56%]; placebo 6% [95% CI -20%, 61%], p = 0.3 for placebo vs salsalate).
Fasting glucose was reduced by 6% during the study by salsalate (p = 0.006) but
did not change with placebo. Declines in glucose were accompanied by declines in 
fasting C-peptide with salsalate. Insulin clearance was reduced with salsalate.
In the salsalate group, triacylglycerol levels were lower by 25% (p = 0.01) and
adiponectin increased by 53% (p = 0.02) at the end of the study. Blood pressure, 
endothelial function and other inflammation markers did not differ between
groups. Adipose tissue nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) activity declined in the
salsalate group compared with placebo (-16% vs 42%, p = 0.005), but was not
correlated with metabolic improvements. The frequency of tinnitus was low but
tended to be higher with salsalate therapy (n = 4 vs n = 2).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In summary, salsalate therapy was well tolerated,
lowered fasting glucose, increased adiponectin and reduced adipose tissue NF-κB
activity. These changes were not related to changes in peripheral insulin
sensitivity, suggesting additional mechanisms for metabolic improvement.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00330733.
FUNDING: Office of Research and Development, Medical Research Service, Department
of Veterans Affairs and NIH K24 DK63214.




Evaluating the efficacy of Salsalate on prediabetic and diabetic patients with
fatty liver: A randomized clinical trial.





OBJECTIVE: Nearly two-third of the patients with type 2 diabetes have degrees of 
fatty liver; this may induce some side effects in them. This study aimed to find 
effect of salsalate on treatment of steatohepatitis and correlation of fatty
liver with metabolic syndrome in the setting of impaired glucose metabolism.
METHODS: In a double-blind randomized trial within two distinct groups, i.e.,
recently diagnosed diabetics and prediabetic cases allocated in two arms of the
intervention to receive 3 g salsalate or placebo. All cases underwent glucose and
lipid level studies and liver ultrasound study.
FINDINGS: Out of 46 patients with diabetes, 34 (74%) had fatty liver in
ultrasound; this ratio was 75% in 113 prediabetic cases. Relative frequency of
fatty liver stages did not differ between diabetics and prediabetics. Within
diabetics, mean aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of fatty liver cases (23 ±
transaminase levels following intervention did not significantly differ,
comparing drug and placebo arms in two subgroups.
CONCLUSION: According to the findings, if diabetes could be assumed as the
logical consequence of prediabetic state, it seems that fatty liver did develop
before this preliminary status. In this study, salsalate could not change
biochemical markers of fatty liver significantly.




Reduction of insulin resistance and plasma glucose level by salsalate treatment
in persons with prediabetes.



OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of salsalate as an antiinflammatory agent on
insulin resistance and glycemic control in persons with prediabetes.
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, 66 persons who 
had prediabetes on the basis of the American Diabetes Association criteria were
enrolled. They were randomly assigned to receive salsalate (3 g daily) or placebo
for 12 weeks. Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and insulin, glucose 2 hours after
oral administration of 75 g of glucose, hemoglobin A1c, lipid profile,
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), and homeostasis
model assessment of beta-cell function were determined before and after
treatment.
RESULTS: Salsalate treatment reduced the FPG level from 5.86 ± 0.07 mmol/L to
changes). Homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell function increased in the
salsalate-treatment group from 139.8 ± 11.0 to 189.4 ± 24.6 (P = .01). At the end
of the study, FPG, HOMA-IR, and insulin levels were significantly different
between salsalate and placebo groups (5.20 ± 0.11 mmol/L versus 5.53 ± 0.10
mmol/L, 3.8 ± 0.3 versus 4.4 ± 0.9, and 16.1 ± 1.9 μIU/mL versus 18.2 ± 2 μIU/mL,
respectively; P<.05 for all). There were no persistent complications after
salsalate therapy.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with salsalate can reduce insulin resistance and the FPG
level in subjects with prediabetes. Determination of the long-term safety and
efficacy of the use of salsalate necessitates further investigation.




Pharmacokinetics of salsalate and salicylic acid in normal and diabetic rats.





The pharmacokinetics (PK) of salsalate (SS) and salicylic acid (SA) was assessed 
in normal Wistar and diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats. Three PK studies were
conducted: (1) PK of SA in normal rats after intravenous dosing of SA at 20, 40, 
and diabetic rats. The disposition of SS and SA were evaluated simultaneously
using a pharmacokinetic model comprising several transit absorption steps and
linear and nonlinear dual elimination pathways for SA. The results indicated that
the nonlinear elimination pathway of SA only accounted for a small fraction of
the total clearance (< 12%) at therapeutic concentrations. A flat profile of SA
was observed after oral dosing of SS, particularly at a high dose. The possible
reasons for this flat profile were posed. During the SS-diet feeding, the
diabetic rats achieved lower blood concentrations of SA than normal rats with a
higher apparent clearance (CL/F), possibly due to incomplete (47%)
bioavailability. Such CL/F decreased with age in both diabetic and normal rats.
The effect of diabetes on SA pharmacokinetics may necessitate increased dosing in
the future usage of SS in diabetes.



Salsalate improves glycemic control in patients with newly diagnosed type 2
diabetes.



Chronic inflammation contributes to insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM). We investigated whether treatment with salsalate, an
anti-inflammatory medication, improves glycemia in a group of newly diagnosed
drug-naïve patients with T2DM. The study was a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Diagnosis of T2DM was made within 2 months of
enrollment, and participants had not received any anti-glycemic agent. Sixty
adults were randomized to receive salsalate (3 g/day) or placebo for 12 weeks.
Fasting plasma glucose and insulin, glucose 2 h after 75 g oral glucose, HbA1C,
lipid profile, HOMA-IR, and HOMA-B were determined before and after treatment.
Salsalate reduced fasting glucose from 6.3 ± 0.2 mmol/l to 5.4 ± 0.2 mmol/l (P < 
insulin levels were increased in the salsalate group from 18.8 ± 1.6 to 21.6 ±
from 6.2% ± 0.2 to 7.9% ± 1.1 mmol/mol, but decreased in the intervention group
from 6.1% ± 0.5 to 5.6% ± 0.2 mmol/mol (P < 0.04 for between-group comparison).
HOMA-IR did not change but HOMA-B increased ~1.7-fold (P = 0.06) in the salsalate
group. The results show that salsalate is effective in improving glycemic control
in newly diagnosed naïve patients with T2DM. The optimal duration of treatment
with salsalate and sustainability of its effect requires further study
(IRCT138709011465N1).




Modeling diabetes disease progression and salsalate intervention in Goto-Kakizaki
rats.



Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) arises owing to insulin resistance and β-cell
dysfunction. Chronic inflammation is widely identified as a cause of T2DM. The
Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rat is a spontaneous rodent model for T2DM with chronic
inflammation. The purpose of this study was to characterize diabetes progression 
in GK rats and evaluate the potential role of the anti-inflammatory agent
salsalate. The GK rats were divided into control groups (n = 6) and salsalate
treatment groups (n = 6), which were fed a salsalate-containing diet from 5 to 21
weeks of age. Blood glucose and salicylate concentrations were measured once a
week. Glucose concentrations showed a biphasic increase in which the first phase 
started at approximately 5 weeks, resulting in an increase by 15 to 25 mg/dl and 
a second phase at 14 to 15 weeks with an upsurge of more than 100 mg/dl. A
mechanism-based model was proposed to describe the natural diabetes progression
and salsalate pharmacodynamics by using a population method in S-ADAPT. Two
transduction cascades were applied to mimic the two T2DM components: insulin
resistance and β-cell dysfunction. Salsalate suppressed both disease factors by a
fraction of 0.622 on insulin resistance and 0.134 on β-cell dysfunction. The
substantial alleviation of diabetes by salsalate supports the hypothesis that
chronic inflammation is a pathogenic factor of diabetes in GK rats. In addition, 
body weight and food intake were measured and further modeled by a
mechanism-based growth model. Modeling results suggest that salsalate reduces
weight gain by enhancing metabolic rate and energy expenditure in both GK and
Wister-Kyoto rats.





Full-spectrum antioxidant therapy featuring astaxanthin coupled with lipoprivic
strategies and salsalate for management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.



Owing to the worldwide epidemic of obesity, and the popularity of diets rich in
sugar and saturated fat, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is increasingly
common; it is usually associated with insulin resistance, and may be considered a
component of the metabolic syndrome. The pathologies which can complicate hepatic
steatosis--steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatic cancer--appear to result from 
an interaction of hepatic lipid overload and hepatic oxidative stress. It is
therefore proposed that comprehensive regimens which effectively target each of
these precipitating factors should achieve the best therapeutic benefit in NAFLD.
Appropriate weight loss, and a diet low in saturated fat, glycemic index, and
added sugars, should decrease hepatic lipid load. Measures which enhance
adipocyte insulin sensitivity--such as pioglitazone, astaxanthin, and
spirulina--may also be helpful in this regard, as may agents that boost
hepatocyte capacity for fatty acid oxidation, such as metformin, carnitine,
hydroxycitrate, long-chain omega-3 fats, and glycine. Astaxanthin and spirulina
appear to have considerable potential for controlling the oxidative stress
associated with NAFLD - the former because it may help to prevent the
mitochondrial damage that renders mitochondria a key source of superoxide in this
syndrome, the latter because it is exceptionally rich in phycocyanobilin, a
phytochemical inhibitor of NAPDH oxidase. Other antioxidants which show some
promise in this syndrome include high-dose folate, lipoic acid, melatonin,
N-acetylcysteine, vitamin E, and taurine. Finally, treatment with salsalate, an
inhibitor of IkappaB kinase-beta, has potential for blunting the adverse impact
of hepatic steatosis on oxidative stress and inflammation.






Salsalate attenuates free fatty acid-induced microvascular and metabolic insulin 
resistance in humans.



OBJECTIVE: Insulin recruits muscle microvasculature, thereby increasing
endothelial exchange surface area. Free fatty acids (FFAs) cause insulin
resistance by activating inhibitor of κB kinase β. Elevating plasma FFAs impairs 
insulin's microvascular and metabolic actions in vivo. Whether salsalate, an
anti-inflammatory agent, prevents FFA-induced microvascular and/or metabolic
insulin resistance in humans is unknown.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Eleven healthy, young adults were studied three
times in random order. After an overnight fast, on two occasions each subject
received a 5-h systemic infusion of Intralipid ± salsalate pretreatment (50
mg/kg/day for 4 days). On the third occasion, saline replaced Intralipid. A 1
mU/kg/min euglycemic insulin clamp was superimposed over the last 2-h of each
study. Skeletal and cardiac muscle microvascular blood volume (MBV),
microvascular flow velocity (MFV), and microvascular blood flow (MBF) were
determined before and after insulin infusion. Whole body glucose disposal rates
were calculated from glucose infusion rates.
RESULTS: Insulin significantly increased skeletal and cardiac muscle MBV and MBF 
without affecting MFV. Lipid infusion abolished insulin-mediated microvascular
recruitment in both skeletal and cardiac muscle and lowered insulin-stimulated
whole body glucose disposal (P<0.001). Salsalate treatment rescued insulin's
actions to recruit muscle microvasculature and improved insulin-stimulated whole 
body glucose disposal in the presence of high plasma FFAs.
CONCLUSIONS: High plasma concentrations of FFAs cause both microvascular and
metabolic insulin resistance, which can be prevented or attenuated by salsalate
treatment. Our data suggest that treatments aimed at inhibition of inflammatory
response might help alleviate vascular insulin resistance and improve metabolic
control in patients with diabetes.




Stimulation of human whole-body energy expenditure by salsalate is fueled by
higher lipid oxidation under fasting conditions and by higher oxidative glucose
disposal under insulin-stimulated conditions.



OBJECTIVE: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs appear to improve insulin
sensitivity and are currently tested in clinical trials. Salsalate, however, may 
blunt mitochondrial function, an unwarranted side effect for type 2 diabetics. We
examined the effect of salsalate on ex vivo mitochondrial function and
lipid-induced insulin resistance.
DESIGN: In a crossover design, nine volunteers underwent a
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp with simultaneous infusion of glycerol
(control), Intralipid, or Intralipid preceded by 4 d of salsalate (4000 mg
Disalsid). Oxidative glucose disposal and nonoxidative glucose disposal (NOGD),
metabolic flexibility, energy expenditure (EE), and ex vivo muscle mitochondrial 
function were measured.
RESULTS: Lipid infusion reduced insulin-stimulated glucose disposal by
approximately 40%, glucose oxidation (CHOox) by approximately 50%, and NOGD by
approximately 35%. Lipid-induced whole-body insulin resistance and decreased NOGD
were not ameliorated by salsalate. However, salsalate repressed lipid-induced
reduction in CHOox and reduced insulin clearance, resulting in higher insulin
levels under basal as well as under clamp conditions (∼25 and ∼39%,
respectively). Intriguingly, EE was higher after administration of salsalate (∼18
and ∼16% under basal and clamp conditions, respectively) and was fueled by
increased fat oxidation in the basal state and increased CHOox upon insulin
stimulation. Salsalate did not affect mitochondrial function and coupling.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that salsalate failed to improve whole-body insulin
sensitivity but increased basal fat oxidation and insulin-stimulated CHOox,
indicating improved metabolic flexibility. The beneficial effects of salsalate on
CHOox can be attributed to elevated insulin levels. Mitochondrial respirometry
revealed no indications that the changes in substrate selection and EE could be
attributed to changes in skeletal muscle mitochondrial capacity or mitochondrial 
coupling.




An overview of salsalate as a potential antidiabetic therapy.



The incidence of type 2 diabetes is increasing at an alarming rate throughout the
world. This is in large part due to the increase in obesity and the aging of the 
population. Therefore, new medications to combat type 2 diabetes are needed.
Salicylates have been used as analgesics and antiinflammatory agents for several 
decades. Incidentally, in some studies it was noted that high-dose salicylate
treatment reduced blood glucose concentrations. Recently, inflammation has been
strongly associated with insulin resistance and diabetes. Some studies show that 
salsalate, which is a nonacetylated form of salicylate, reduces blood glucose
concentrations in patients with type 2 diabetes, as well as in insulin-resistant 
patients without diabetes. Postulated mechanisms include the inhibition of
nuclear factor NF-kappa-B. Discussed in this review are the efficacy, safety and 
mechanisms of salsalate relevant to the treatment of type 2 diabetes.






Effects of salsalate therapy on recovery from vascular injury in female Zucker
fatty rats.



OBJECTIVE: Salsalate is a dimeric form of salicylic acid that has been shown to
have anti-inflammatory activity and to reduce glucose levels, insulin resistance,
and cytokine expression. However, the effect of salsalate on vascular injury has 
not been determined. The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of 
salsalate on vascular injury and repair in a rat model of carotid artery balloon 
catheter injury.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Salsalate treatment was started in female Zucker
fatty rats (insulin resistant) 1 week before carotid artery balloon catheter
injury and continued for 21 days, at which time the animals were killed and
studied.
RESULTS: Treatment with salsalate significantly decreased the intima-to-media
ratio and upregulated the expression of aortic endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS), phosphorylated eNOS (p-eNOS) (ser 1177), and manganese superoxide
dismutase (MnSOD) and reduced serum interleukin (IL)-6 with concomitant
downregulation of nuclear factor (NF) κB subunit p65 and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) expression in the balloon-injured carotid artery of female
Zucker fatty rats.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows that salsalate treatment decreases vascular 
damage caused by balloon catheter injury in female Zucker fatty rats. The
beneficial effect of salsalate on vascular injury was associated with
upregulation of eNOS, p-eNOS, and MnSOD, which reduce oxidative stress and have
anti-inflammatory properties, as evidenced by reduction in serum IL-6 and the
downregulation of VEGF and NFκB, which promote inflammation without changing
glucose levels. These results suggest that salsalate may be useful in reducing
vascular injury and restenosis following interventional revascularization
procedures.




Salsalate is poorly tolerated and fails to improve endothelial function in
virologically suppressed HIV-infected adults.



In this 13-week, open-label, randomized study of the anti-inflammatory salsalate 
versus usual care, there were no significant improvements in flow-mediated
dilation of the brachial artery, endothelial activation, inflammation or
coagulation markers, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance or
lipoproteins with salsalate or between groups in virologically suppressed,
HIV-infected adults on antiretrovirals. Tinnitus and transaminitis occurred
frequently in the salsalate group. Dose reduction due to toxicities encountered
and low level of inflammation may explain these results.




Delayed recrudescence to toxic salicylate concentrations after salsalate
overdose.





Salicylates are common exposures. We report an unusual case of salicylate
ingestion, as salsalate, with resolution of symptoms and return of salicylate
levels to non-toxic values, with a subsequent, unexpected recrudescence to toxic 
levels requiring reinstitution of therapy. A 31-year-old man ingested unknown
amounts of salsalate, hydroxyzine, and a benzodiazepine. He was intubated and
treated with IV sodium bicarbonate and two doses of oral activated charcoal.
Eight hours after presentation, his serum salicylate concentration peaked at 55
mg/dL, and then decreased to a nadir of 5.6 mg/dL 38 h after presentation,
coinciding with return of GI motility. Several hours later salicylate
concentrations began to rise, peaking 67 h after presentation at 61.7 mg/dL. He
was treated with sodium bicarbonate and charcoal, which resulted in decreased
serum salicylate to therapeutic levels. Salicylate ingestions are known to
exhibit unusual toxicokinetics and absorption in overdose; however, this is the
first case we are aware of that shows a return to toxic concentrations after
apparent resolution of toxicity. Recrudescence of salicylate concentrations to a 
degree that would dictate reinstitution of therapy for overdose is unusual and
may warrant prolonged monitoring of serum salicylate concentrations in salsalate 
ingestions.




The effects of salsalate on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
randomized trial.



BACKGROUND: Salsalate, a nonacetylated prodrug of salicylate, has been shown to
decrease blood glucose concentration in small studies.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of salsalate at different doses in 
patients with type 2 diabetes.
DESIGN: Parallel randomized trial with computer-generated randomization and
centralized allocation. Patients and investigators, including those assessing
outcomes and performing analyses, were masked to group assignment.
(ClinicalTrials.gov registration number: NCT00392678)
SETTING: 3 private practices and 14 universities in the United States.
PATIENTS: Persons aged 18 to 75 years with fasting plasma glucose concentrations 
of 12.5 mmol/L or less (< or = 225 mg/dL) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels of
at least 8 weeks.
INTERVENTION: After a 4-week, single-masked run-in period, patients were randomly
assigned to receive placebo or salsalate in dosages of 3.0, 3.5, or 4.0 g/d for
MEASUREMENTS: Change in HbA1c was the primary outcome. Adverse effects and
changes in measures of coronary risk and renal function were secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: Higher proportions of patients in the 3 salsalate treatment groups
experienced decreases in HbA1c levels of 0.5% or more from baseline (P = 0.009). 
Mean HbA1c changes were -0.36% (P = 0.02) at 3.0 g/d, -0.34% (P = 0.02) at 3.5
g/d, and -0.49% (P = 0.001) at 4.0 g/d compared with placebo. Other markers of
glycemic control also improved in the 3 salsalate groups, as did circulating
triglyceride and adiponectin concentrations. Mild hypoglycemia was more common
with salsalate; documented events occurred only in patients taking sulfonylureas.
Urine albumin concentrations increased in all salsalate groups compared with
placebo. The drug was otherwise well tolerated.
LIMITATION: The number of patients studied and the trial duration were
insufficient to warrant recommending the use of salsalate for type 2 diabetes at 
this time.
CONCLUSION: Salsalate lowers HbA1c levels and improves other markers of glycemic 
control in patients with type 2 diabetes and may therefore provide a new avenue
for treatment. Renal and cardiac safety of the drug require further evaluation.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health.




Summaries for patients. The effects of salsalate on blood sugar control in people
with type 2 diabetes.



Salsalate may have broad utility in the prevention and treatment of vascular
disorders and the metabolic syndrome.



In the high proportion of vascular disorders associated with excessive oxidative 
stress and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, activation of NF-kappaB
plays a key pathogenic role. Thus, there is considerable evidence that NF-kappaB 
is a mediator of atherogenesis, plaque destabilization, ischemia-reperfusion
damage, cardiac remodeling, atrial fibrillation, and aneurysm formation and
rupture; some studies suggest that it may also play a role in the microvascular
complications of diabetes. I kappaB kinase-beta (IKK beta) is the upstream kinase
that appears to be primarily responsible for NF-kappaB activation in these
disorders; moreover, chronic IKK beta activation plays a prominent role in
induction of insulin resistance in the metabolic syndrome. Salicylate inhibits
IKK beta in concentrations that are achievable with dose schedules traditionally 
used in treating rheumatoid arthritis (3-4.5 g daily); indeed, this is likely to 
be the mechanism responsible for salicylate's utility in this disorder.
Salicylate, unlike aspirin, is only a very weak, reversible inhibitor of
cyclooxygenase in clinical doses, and thus is not associated with the potentially
dangerous side effects seen with NSAIDs; fully reversible ototoxicity, the
dose-limiting side effect in salicylate therapy, can be avoided in most patients 
by dosage adjustment. Hence, it is proposed that salicylate may have practical
utility in the prevention or management of a wide range of vascular disorders as 
well as of metabolic syndrome and diabetes; its efficacy in these regards would
likely be complemented by effective antioxidant measures, which would lessen the 
stimulus to NF-kappaB activation while providing benefits independent of
NF-kappaB activity. Salsalate, consisting of two salicylate molecules united by
an ester bond, is a venerable drug that may be the best tolerated delivery
vehicle for salicylate. Appropriate rodent studies should pave the way for
clinical trials with salsalate in patients at vascular risk.


Use of salsalate to target inflammation in the treatment of insulin resistance
and type 2 diabetes.



OBJECTIVES: Chronic subacute inflammation is implicated in the pathogenesis of
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Salicylates were shown years ago to lower
glucose and more recently to inhibit NF-kappaB activity. Salsalate, a prodrug
form of salicylate, has seen extensive clinical use and has a favorable safety
profile. We studied the efficacy of salsalate in reducing glycemia and insulin
resistance and potential mechanisms of action to validate NF-kappaB as a
potential pharmacologic target in diabetes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In open label studies, both high (4.5 g/d) and standard (3.0
g/d) doses of salsalate reduced fasting and postchallenge glucose levels after 2 
weeks of treatment. Salsalate increased glucose utilization during euglycemic
hyperinsulinemic clamps, by approximately 50% and 15% at the high and standard
doses, respectively, and insulin clearance was decreased. Dose-limiting tinnitus 
occurred only at the higher dose. In a third, double-masked, placebo-controlled
trial, 1 month of salsalate at maximum tolerable dose (no tinnitus) improved
fasting and postchallenge glucose levels. Circulating free fatty acids were
reduced and adiponectin increased in all treated subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that salsalate improves in vivo glucose and
lipid homeostasis, and support targeting of inflammation and NF-kappaB as a
therapeutic approach in type 2 diabetes.





The effect of salsalate on insulin action and glucose tolerance in obese
non-diabetic patients: results of a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled
study.



AIM/HYPOTHESIS: Low-grade inflammation may contribute to obesity-related insulin 
resistance and has been associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. The present study evaluated whether treatment with salsalate, a
traditional anti-inflammatory medication, would improve insulin action in obese
non-diabetic individuals.
METHODS: The study was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel
trial conducted at the inpatient clinical research unit of the NIDKK (Phoenix,
AZ, USA). Participants were 54 adults (18 to 45 years of age) with BMI >or= 30
kg/m(2). The intervention was salsalate (3 g/day, n = 28) or identical placebo (n
= 26) for 7 days. The allocation was kept concealed by giving the investigator
only a number corresponding to a vial of placebo or salsalate sequentially
randomised in blocks by sex. Main outcomes were changes in insulin action
assessed as rate of glucose disposal (R (d)) by euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic
clamp (insulin infusion rate 40 mU m(-2) min(-1)) and glucose tolerance by 75 g
OGTT.
RESULTS: The study was completed by 47 participants, of which 40 were analysed
(salsalate n = 22, placebo n = 18). Salsalate treatment resulted in decreased
fasting plasma glucose concentration (mean [SD]; 4.83 [0.28] vs 5.11 [0.33]
mmol/l, p = 0.001) and glucose AUC during the OGTT (p = 0.01), and in increased R
(d) (20 [8] vs 18 [6] micromol [kg estimated metabolic body size](-1) min(-1), p 
= 0.002), while there was no significant change in these variables with placebo
(p > 0.3 for all). The effect of salsalate on R (d) disappeared (p = 0.9) after
normalising to increased insulin concentrations (701 [285] vs 535 [201] pmol/l, p
< 0.0001) measured during the clamp. No side effects of salsalate were observed
during the study.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The glucose-lowering potential of salicylates appears
to be due to effects on insulin concentration rather than improved insulin
action. Salicylate-based compounds may be useful for the treatment and prevention
of type 2 diabetes.




Fluorimetric determination of salsalate in urine, serum and pharmaceutical
preparations.



A method for the determination of salsalate at concentrations between 0.10 and
Salsalate, lightly soluble in water, is totally extracted into chloroform. In
this organic phase, the drug shows low fluorescence but when an alkaline medium
is provided, salsalate undergoes a substantial increase of the fluorescent
intensity. Thus, the determination is performed in a chloroformic medium, where
pyrrolidine chloroformic solution is added to give the basic character. The
fluorescence measurements to quantify salsalate are carried out in its
fluorescent band centered at lambda(ex)=299 nm and lambda(em)=410 nm. The method 
was successfully applied to the determination of salsalate in authentic
pharmaceutical preparations, urine and serum. Samples of these latter two
matrices, urine and serum, are extracted into chloroform, using in the aqueous
phase a pH 4.8, provided by adding acetic acid/sodium acetate buffer solution.
Owing to matrix interference, the method of standard additions was used to
determine salsalate in the serum. The sensitivity and repeatability achieved with
the proposed method are adequate for the determination of salsalate in these
matrices.





Serum concentration-dependent hepatotoxicity in individuals receiving oral
salsalate.






Improvement in HIV-related endothelial dysfunction using the anti-inflammatory
agent salsalate: a pilot study.



We hypothesized that heightened systemic inflammation contributes to the
increased rate of cardiovascular events in HIV-infected patients not receiving
combination antiretroviral therapy. We performed a pilot trial to assess the
effects of the nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitor salsalate on flow-mediated
dilation of the brachial artery, a measure of endothelial function. Flow-mediated
dilation significantly improved after 8 weeks of salsalate. However,
hepatotoxicity occurred frequently. Research using alternative agents is
warranted to examine the role of inflammation in HIV-related cardiovascular
disease.




Salsalate improves glycemia and inflammatory parameters in obese young adults.



OBJECTIVE: Sedentary lifestyle and a western diet promote subacute-chronic
inflammation, obesity, and subsequently dysglycemia. The aim of the current study
was to evaluate the efficacy of the anti-inflammatory drug salsalate to improve
glycemia by reducing systemic inflammation in obese adults at risk for the
development of type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In a double-masked, placebo controlled trial, we
evaluated 20 obese nondiabetic adults at baseline and after 1 month of salsalate 
or placebo.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo, salsalate reduced fasting glucose 13% (P <
glycated albumin 17% (P < 0.0003). Although insulin levels were unchanged,
fasting and oral glucose tolerance test C-peptide levels decreased in the
salsalate-treated subjects compared with placebo (P < 0.03), consistent with
improved insulin sensitivity and a known effect of salicylates to inhibit insulin
clearance. Adiponectin increased 57% after salsalate compared with placebo (P <
levels of C-reactive protein were reduced by 34% (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This proof-of-principle study demonstrates that salsalate reduces
glycemia and may improve inflammatory cardiovascular risk indexes in overweight
individuals. These data support the hypothesis that subacute-chronic inflammation
contributes to the pathogenesis of obesity-related dysglycemia and that targeting
inflammation may provide a therapeutic route for diabetes prevention.




Blood pressure elevation in a patient treated with salsalate.



OBJECTIVE: To report a case of increased blood pressure associated with the use
of salsalate in an elderly patient with no prior history of hypertension.
CASE SUMMARY: A 78-year-old white man with no prior history of hypertension
initiated salsalate therapy for low-back pain. Over the 15 months prior to the
initiation of salsalate, his blood pressure averaged 127 +/- 7 mm Hg systolic and
experienced significant elevations in blood pressure, which led to a preliminary 
diagnosis of hypertension. Blood pressure after initiation of salsalate averaged 
or medication doses (with the exception of warfarin) occurred in the 18 months
prior to or during salsalate therapy. His weight remained stable. A detailed
review of his medical records and history revealed no other causes for these
elevations in blood pressure. Salsalate therapy was discontinued and his blood
pressure returned to normotensive levels (119 +/- 2 mm Hg systolic and 81 +/- 2
mm Hg diastolic).
DISCUSSION: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced elevations in
blood pressure have been well documented in patients receiving antihypertensive
medications. Due to its relative weak inhibition of cyclooxygenase and lack of
published literature in hypertensive patients, salsalate is considered to have
little or no effect on blood pressure. Our report documents a possible case of
salsalate-induced hypertension in a previously normotensive elderly man.
Observational studies suggest that NSAID use may increase the risk of developing 
hypertension in older patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should be aware of the possible effects of NSAIDs on
blood pressure. Blood pressure monitoring following the initiation of salsalate
may be warranted, particularly in older patients.




Lichenoid drug eruption to salsalate.



Cutaneous lichenoid eruptions can arise as a result of exogenous compound
exposures. Pharmaceutical drugs, industrial compounds, and inhaled particles have
been implicated as causative agents. To date, there have been no recorded cases
of lichenoid drug eruptions (LDEs) caused by clinical use of the nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug salsalate. We describe a patient who experienced a
lichenoid eruption after the initiation of salsalate for relief of arthritic
pain. This eruption emerged after 1 month of therapy with salsalate, persisted
for as long as salsalate was administered, and cleared within 3 weeks of
discontinuing the medication. LDEs can clinically and histologically resemble
idiopathic or classic lichen planus. Integrating drug history, clinical
morphology, clinical distribution, and histopathology can aid in the
differentiation. As in our patient's case, curative treatment for LDE requires
discontinuation of the drug.




Hydrogen bonding in salicylsalicylic acid (salsalate) crystals.



An X-ray crystallographic study of the drug salsalicylic acid (salsalate) has
been performed. Crystal formation of the drug is influenced by both inter- and
intra-molecular hydrogen bonding. In addition an OH group in salsalate can occupy
alternate ortho positions resulting in two hydrogen bonding motifs within a
single crystal.





Salsalate and salicylate binding to and their displacement of thyroxine from
thyroxine-binding globulin, transthyrin, and albumin.



Salsalate and its metabolite salicylate are inhibitors of thyroid hormone binding
to serum transport proteins and reduce serum total thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3) in vivo. The present study is the first to examine and
compare salsalate and salicylate binding to human thyroxine-binding globulin
(TBG), transthyretin (TTR), albumin (ALB), and whole human serum, and
displacement by salsalate and salicylate of T4 from isolated TBG, TTR, ALB.
Salsalate and salicylate binding were studied by ultrafiltration at salsalate
concentrations of 0.24-1.16 mM (62-300 microg/mL) and salicylate concentrations
of 0.0375-2.25 mM (6.0-360 microg/mL). T4 displacement by salsalate and
salicylate from TBG, TTR, and ALB was studied by equilibrium dialysis at
salsalate concentrations of 0 to 1.52 mM (0-393 microg/mL) and salicylate
concentrations of 0 to 60 mM (0-9600 microg/mL). In normal human serum, 95% of
salsalate and 76% of salicylate were protein-bound. In the presence of isolated
ALB, 89% of salsalate and 64% of salicylate were ALB-bound. Both salsalate and
salicylate inhibited T4 binding to all 3 major T4 binding proteins. Both
displaced proportionately more T4 from TBG compared with TTR and ALB. The
principal site to which both salsalate and salicylate in serum is bound (ALB) is 
different from the principal site from which they displace T4 (TBG). Salsalate
potency in displacing T4 from TBG and ALB was approximately 100-fold greater than
salicylate potency.




Changes in thyroid function tests during short-term salsalate use.



Although long-term administration of salsalate depresses blood levels of both
total thyroxine (T4) and total triiodothyronine (T3) and at least transiently
decreases serum thyrotropin (TSH), changes in thyroid function tests have not
been fully characterized during its short-term use. It is also unclear if the
observed changes are solely the result of decreased hormone binding to carrier
proteins or if reduced hepatic 5'-monodeiodinase activity is important. Blood was
sampled at baseline (day 0) and after 24 hours (day 1) and 72 hours (day 3) in
eight subjects taking a therapeutic dose of salsalate 1,500 mg twice daily. Total
T4 decreased from 90.1+/-7.7 nmol/L (mean+/-SD) on day 0 to 82.9+/-8.6 nmol/L on 
day 1 (P=.1 v baseline) and 68.6+/-8.7 nmol/L on day 3 (P=.0001). Total T3
decreased from 1.76+/-0.20 nmol/L to 1.61+/-0.16 nmol/L on day 1 (P<.05) and
and remained unchanged after 3 days. Levels of reverse T3 (rT3) were reduced from
index (FTI) declined in parallel with total T4, the free T4 level by direct
equilibrium dialysis (FTD) was unchanged after 3 days. Serum TSH decreased from
after 3 days (0.95+/-0.49 mU/L, P<.05). In conclusion, (1) therapeutic doses of
salsalate significantly decrease serum concentrations of total T4, total T3, and 
rT3 to about 75% of baseline levels after 3 days without altering the T4/T3
ratio; (2) although the FTD does not change, serum TSH concentrations remain
suppressed; and (3) the proportionate decrease in total thyroid hormone levels
suggests that inhibition of hormone binding to serum proteins is more important
in producing these changes than reduced hepatic 5'-monodeiodinase activity.





Lingual lesions secondary to prolonged contact with salsalate tablets.






Simultaneous determination of salicylamide and salsalate in serum and urine by
first derivative variable-angle synchronous fluorescence spectrometry.



The determination of salicylamide and salsalate in human serum and urine is
performed using a simple, rapid, sensitive, and selective method. The broad-band 
overlapping conventional spectra of both compounds are resolved by means of first
derivative variable-angle synchronous fluorescence spectrometry. The method is
based on the intrinsic fluorescence of both drugs in chloroformic solution. The
measurements are performed in an alkaline medium, which is adjusted by adding
applied for the simultaneous determination of salicylamide and salsalate, at
concentrations between 0.100 and 1. 000 microg mL-1 for both components, by means
of absolute values of a first derivative variable-angle synchronous scan at the
emission/excitation wavelengths of 410/299 nm for salicylamide and 440/307 nm for
salsalate. Serum and urine are extracted with chloroform, by adding acetate
buffer solution to provide pH 4.8 in the aqueous phase. Finally, pyrrolidine
chloroformic solution is added to organic phase, where both components are
determined, without the need for a reextraction step to an aqueous phase.






Salsalate administration--a potential pharmacological model of the sick euthyroid
syndrome.





This study examined salsalate ingestion as a model of the sequelae of acute
inhibition of thyroid hormone binding to serum protein. One dose of salsalate
(60-65 mg/kg) was administered to healthy volunteers. Serum salsalate
concentrations peaked at 2 h (82 micrograms/mL), then declined at 8 h to 1.2
micrograms/mL. Serum total T4 (TT4) and total T3 (TT3) concentrations declined
for 4 h, then recovered by 96 h, while T4 binding protein concentrations remained
unchanged. TT3 was reduced to a greater extent than TT4 between 2 h and 72 h, and
serum total reverse(r)T3 (TrT3) was transiently increased at 8 h. TSH
concentrations fell while TT4 and TT3 fell, then recovered while TT4, TT3, and
free T3, but not free T4, were still reduced. Subsequently, TSH overshot basal
levels and continued to rise after 96 h while TT4, TT3, free T4, free T3, and
TrT3 were all at basal levels. We postulate that an acute release of T4 and T3
from circulating transport proteins, induced by an inhibitor of binding, can
result in large and rapid redistribution of T4 and T3 into tissue compartments
associated with transiently reduced peripheral tissue 5'-monodeiodination and
deranged TSH regulation.




Salsalate, morphine, and postoperative ileus.



BACKGROUND: Previously, we demonstrated that ketorolac, a nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug (NSAID), prevented postoperative small bowel ileus in a
rodent model. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of salsalate, an
NSAID without antiplatelet effect, on postoperative ileus alone or in combination
with morphine.
METHODS: Forty-eight rats underwent placement of duodenal catheters and were then
randomly assigned to one of eight groups (n = 6). Four groups had standardized
laparotomy following drug administration, whereas 4 groups underwent the same
treatment without laparotomy: control and morphine animals received 0.1 mL
alcohol via the catheter, whereas salsalate and salsalate-plus-morphine animals
received salsalate (15 mg/kg) dissolved in 0.1 mL alcohol. The animals also
received 0.5 mg/kg morphine (morphine and salsalate plus morphine) or the same
volume of saline (control and salsalate) subcutaneously. Transit was measured
following the injection of a nonabsorbed marker via the duodenal catheter and is 
defined as the geometric center (GC) of distribution. An additional 20 rats had
serosal electrodes placed on the jejunum, and were assigned to one of four
treatment groups (control, salsalate, morphine, and salsalate plus morphine; n = 
migrating myoelectric complex (MMC) following laparotomy.
RESULTS: Laparotomy and morphine independently reduced small bowel transit (P =
+/- 0.2 control versus 2.2 +/- 0.3 laparotomy versus 3.6 +/- 0.4 morphine), but
morphine did not further worsen postoperative transit (GC 2.4 +/- 0.4; P = 0.42).
Although salsalate did not alter baseline transit, pretreatment improved
postoperative transit (P = 0.0002; GC 3.6 +/- 0.4). This effect was lost with the
addition of morphine (GC 2.7 +/- 0.2; P = 0.21). The MMCs returned earlier after 
laparotomy in salsalate-pretreated rats (63 +/- 18 minutes salsalate versus 160
+/- 12 minutes laparotomy; P < 0.01, one-way ANOVA). However, this effect was
also lost in animals receiving morphine (106 +/- 16 min; P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Salsalate improves postoperative small bowel motility in a rodent
model; however, this effect is masked by morphine.




Assessment of salsalate, a nonacetylated salicylate, in the treatment of patients
with arthritis.



This study evaluated physicians' use of the occurrence of tinnitus as a tool to
establish the optimal dosage of salsalate, a nonacetylated salicylate, in
patients with arthritis treated in routine clinical practice. The use of printed 
educational materials to improve compliance was also studied prospectively. A
total of 782 patients were enrolled in this 3-week study by 95 general
practitioners in an office setting. Of the 771 assessable patients, 90.0% had
osteoarthritis, 9.7% had rheumatoid arthritis, and 0.3% had both types of
arthritis. Most patients experienced improvement of symptoms after 3 weeks of
treatment. There were no differences in the rates of improvement at the first and
third weeks of treatment between patients with osteoarthritis and patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, duration of arthritis had no effect on rates
of improvement. Rates of patient satisfaction tended to increase over the study
period. Rates of patient satisfaction did not differ significantly at the first
and third weeks between patients who did not receive printed educational
materials and whose who did not. Treatment was discontinued in 234 patients
(30.4%) because of side effects. The most frequent reasons for discontinuation
were gastrointestinal symptoms (n = 102; 13.2%) and tinnitus (n = 52; 6.7%). The 
clinical effectiveness and safety of salsalate were confirmed in patients with
arthritis in routine clinical practice settings.





Salsalate, a nonacetylated salicylate, is as efficacious as diclofenac in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Salsalate-Diclofenac Study Group.



OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy of salsalate, a nonacetylated salicylate, 
in the treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Three hundred and one patients meeting the ACR criteria for RA were
drawn from 16 centers. After withdrawal of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAID) and subsequent flare, patients were randomized to receive either
salsalate or diclofenac for 8 weeks, according to a double blind, double dummy
protocol. Initial doses of salsalate 3.0 g/day and diclofenac 75 mg/day were
titrated for the first 5 weeks. The primary outcome measure was a multivariate
analysis at 8 weeks of tender joint count, pain, visual analog scale score, and
physician's global assessment.
RESULTS: One hundred and ninety patients completed the study. The mean stabilized
dose of salsalate was 3.55 g/day, and that of diclofenac 112 mg/day.
Discontinuations were due to lack of efficacy (17 salsalate vs 15 diclofenac);
adverse events [19 salsalate (mainly tinnitus and hearing loss; p = 0.0001 and p 
= 0.04, respectively) vs 9 diclofenac]; laboratory abnormalities (3 salsalate vs 
illness, and personal factors (24 salsalate vs 23 diclofenac). Both treatments
produced significant improvement from flare (p < 0.0001). Post hoc power analysis
showed that the study had sufficient power (0.60 to 0.90) to detect clinically
important differences between the 2 drugs in the primary outcome measures;
however, no statistically significant (p = 0.29) or clinically important
treatment differences were recorded. Other than a difference in erythrocyte
sedimentation rate that favored salsalate, there were no significant differences 
in secondary outcome measures between the 2 groups. All outcomes showed a
tendency for more improvement with salsalate.
CONCLUSION: Salsalate is as efficacious as diclofenac. Salsalate may be
considered an alternative to other NSAID in the first line treatment of patients 
with RA.





Salsalate intoxication and ramifications of utilizing nonspecific analytical
methods in estimating quantitative blood concentrations.



In a case involving poisoning with salsalate, a salicylate analogue, the initial 
blood concentration of the parent drug was underestimated because of the low
cross-reactivity of the immunoassay used for the analysis. This resulted in
unnecessary additional clinical and laboratory evaluations to find the cause of
metabolic acidosis exhibited by the patient. Additional findings led to the
conclusion that parent salsalate contributed to patient toxicity. For testing
purposes, all salicylate compounds should not necessarily be classified into one 
salicylic acid category, and there must be detailed communication between the
caregiver and the laboratory regarding the specific drug history.





Salsalate-induced pancytopenia in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus.



After a patient with a history of systemic lupus erythematosus in remission was
given salsalate, all of her hematologic elements, especially leukocytes,
profoundly decreased within hours, although the patient was receiving steroids.
She had been challenged with salsalate at an earlier date, with a similar but
less impressive drop in blood counts. Granulocytotoxic antibodies persisted
during this episode in contrast to declining lymphocytotoxic and anti-native DNA 
antibodies that accompanied a remission of systemic lupus. This is the first case
of this kind occurring with salsalate therapy and may have represented preformed 
antibodies induced by salsalate.





Case report: abnormal thyroid function tests in a patient and two normal
volunteers treated with salsalate.



There are only three prior reports of abnormal thyroid function tests in patients
who have received salsalate, the salicylate ester of salicylic acid. The authors 
report an elderly clinically euthyroid man who had thyroid function tests
suggestive of central hypothyroidism while taking salsalate but whose thyroid
tests returned to normal after the drug was discontinued. They also studied
thyroid function tests, including free thyroxine (FT4) and reverse (T3), in two
normal volunteers who took salsalate 750 mg twice daily for 1 week. In the normal
subjects, total T4 and FT4 began to fall within 24 hours after the first dose of 
salsalate, and remained suppressed for at least 24 hours after the drug was
discontinued. This rapidity of effect by salsalate is previously undescribed.
There was also a fall in FT4, probably due to the use of diluted serum in the
equilibrium dialysis FT4 assay. Because FT4 measurement using diluted serum or
equilibrium dialysis may cause falsely low FT4 measurements, the authors believe 
ultrafiltration may be the only reliable method of measuring FT4 in these
patients.





Synthesis and some properties of two salsalate derivatives.



The synthesis of esters of 2-hydroxy benzoic acid-2-carboxyphenyl ester
(salsalate) with guaiacol for the treatment of inflammatory bronchopneumopathies 
is reported. The antiinflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic activities of these 
derivatives were evaluated, together with their antioxidant, mucolytic and
broncho-bacteriostatic properties in comparison to acetylsalicylic acid.





[Salsalate: is it more tolerated than other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents?].







Effect of food on salsalate absorption.



To assess the effect of food on salsalate absorption, single 1500-mg oral doses
of salsalate were administered to 17 men under fasted and fed conditions
according to a randomized open-label crossover design. A 7-day washout separated 
treatment periods. Blood samples were drawn throughout the 48-h period following 
dose administration and the resulting plasma samples assayed by high-performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) for unchanged drug, salsalate, and the major
metabolite, salicylic acid. When results for the fasted and fed treatments were
compared, no significant differences were observed in the pharmacokinetic
parameters for the major metabolite salicylic acid or in the extent of absorption
of unchanged drug; however, the rate of salsalate absorption was affected.
Although the time-to-peak for salsalate was significantly delayed by
approximately 1 h in the presence of food, the peak level was not significantly
affected. The lack of difference between the two treatments for the therapeutic
moiety, salicylic acid, indicates a lack of a significant food effect on single
doses of salsalate.





Abnormal thyroid function test results in patients taking salsalate.



OBJECTIVE: To evaluate how the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent salsalate
affects the results of routine thyroid function tests.
DESIGN: In a cohort of patients taking salsalate for various rheumatic
conditions, thyroid function tests were performed with patients on and off the
drug.
SETTING: Primary care of ambulatory patients in a university medical center.
PATIENTS: A convenience sample of 14 euthyroid subjects, none of whom was taking 
thyroid hormone or other medication recognized to alter thyroid function.
INTERVENTION: Treatment with therapeutic doses of salsalate for a mean period of 
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Serum levels of thyroxine (T4), free T4, thyroid hormone
binding ratio, free T4 index (the product of T4 and the thyroid hormone binding
ratio), triiodothyronine, and thyrotropin.
RESULTS: Serum T4 dropped from a mean baseline level of 96.7 nmol/L off salsalate
to 53.4 nmol/L on it (P less than .001), and the free T4 index showed a parallel 
decline from 85.9 to 50.4 (P less than .001), with both values falling into the
hypothyroid range. Similarly, free T4 levels and total triiodothyronine
concentrations were low in several patients treated with salsalate. Serum
thyrotropin levels declined transiently, falling from a mean of 3.2 to 1.7 mU/L
(P less than .02) in patients treated for less than 3 weeks. Patients treated for
longer periods had levels comparable to baseline. Despite these changes in the
thyroid function test results, all subjects remained clinically euthyroid.
CONCLUSION: Salsalate commonly produces abnormalities in routine thyroid function
test results similar to those found in central hypothyroidism.





Hemostatic effects of salsalate in normal subjects and patients with hemophilia
A.



Salsalate in a non-acetylated salicylate with activity as an antirheumatic agent.
The hemostatic effects of this agent were studied in twelve healthy subjects and 
nine patients with hemophilia A. Healthy subjects showed no change in bleeding
time, platelet aggregation response to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) or collagen,
or adenosine triphosphate (ATP) release in response to arachidonic acid as
measured in an impedance whole blood lumi-aggregometer. The patients with
hemophilia A showed no bleeding time prolongation nor an effect on ADP or
collagen induced platelet aggregation in platelet rich plasma. It is concluded
that this agent may be useful in the treatment of arthritis in patients with
hereditary coagulation disorders.





Comparison of salsalate and aspirin on mucosal injury and gastroduodenal mucosal 
prostaglandins.



The effects of a 7.5-day course of orally administered salsalate (3.0 g/day),
aspirin (3.9 g/day), or placebo on gastroduodenal mucosal injury, mucosal
prostaglandin content, and plasma prostaglandin concentrations in healthy,
asymptomatic human volunteers were examined. Mean serum salicylate concentrations
after these doses of salsalate and aspirin were nearly identical (approximately
after the final dose of medication, there was minimal mucosal injury in
placebo-treated or salsalate-treated subjects and considerable injury in the
stomach and duodenum of aspirin-treated subjects (P less than 0.001, aspirin vs. 
salsalate or placebo). In both the stomach and duodenum, aspirin lowered mucosal 
prostaglandin F2a and E2 content by greater than 90% (P less than 0.001), whereas
salsalate produced no significant change. Aspirin also lowered plasma
prostaglandin F2a concentrations by 58% +/- 6%, whereas salsalate lowered them by
only 11% +/- 9% (P less than 0.001). Thus, the nonacetylated salicylate,
salsalate, produced much less gastroduodenal mucosal damage than aspirin at
equivalent serum salicylate concentrations, possibly because salsalate did not
inhibit mucosal prostaglandin synthesis.





Salsalate cross-sensitivity in aspirin-sensitive patients with asthma.



Ten aspirin (ASA)-sensitive patients with asthma underwent double-blind,
placebo-controlled oral challenges with salsalate followed by ASA-sensitive
confirmatory challenges. All 10 patients sustained asthmatic reactions to ASA,
but only two developed respiratory reactions to 2 gm of salsalate. In these two
patients, repeat confirmatory challenges with 2 gm of salsalate reproduced the
same asthmatic reactions. Both patients were desensitized to ASA, and
cross-desensitization with 2 gm of salsalate was then achieved. We conclude that 
salsalate, a weak inhibitor of cyclooxygenase in vitro, is less likely than ASA
to induce asthma in known ASA-sensitive patients with asthma but may occasionally
cross-react in these patients. Such reactions were mild and easily treated with
beta 2-agonists.





Gastroduodenal mucosal damage with salsalate versus aspirin: results of
experimental models and endoscopic studies in humans.



Animal models have identified multiple mechanisms of aspirin toxicity. Aspirin
inhibits cyclooxygenase in the gastroduodenal mucosa leading to a decrease in
endogenous prostaglandins. Prostaglandin mediated mucus and bicarbonate
secretion, epithelial hydrophobicity, blood flow, and cellular proliferation are 
all decreased. Salicylates may cause direct cellular toxicity via inhibition of
energy metabolism and membrane transport properties. Salicylate preparations have
been designed to decrease gastroduodenal absorption. Endoscopic studies in humans
have confirmed that buffering of aspirin does not ameliorate damage, but enteric 
coating does. Salicylsalicylic acid (salsalate) is an effective antirheumatic
drug that bypasses gastric absorption and also avoids cyclooxygenase inhibition. 
In a randomized, single-blind, endoscopic comparison of salsalate versus
enteric-coated aspirin, significantly less gastroduodenal damage was observed in 
volunteers after salsalate administration compared to enteric-coated aspirin. An 
endoscopic study in rheumatoid arthritics also confirmed the ability of salsalate
to spare gastroduodenal mucosa when compared to naproxen administration.
Salsalate may cause less gastroduodenal damage than enteric-coated aspirin based 
on the results of animal models and endoscopic studies in humans.





Reduced risk of NSAID gastropathy (GI mucosal toxicity) with nonacetylated
salicylate (salsalate): an endoscopic study.



This randomized, investigator-blinded, parallel group endoscopic study evaluated 
the effects of salsalate and naproxen on the gastroduodenal mucosa over a 3-month
period in patients with RA. Using therapeutic doses of the drugs, 8 of 21
patients (38%) in the naproxen group had endoscopically shown active ulcers
(seven patients) or diffuse erosions (one patient), whereas none of the 18
patients treated with salsalate (0%) had such lesions (P = .003). Five of the
eight naproxen-treated patients with evidence of GI damage were asymptomatic at
the time of endoscopic verification of their lesions. The most significant
disadvantage of salsalate was its higher incidence of otologic problems
accounting for six of the nine discontinuations with salsalate. However, the
findings of this study suggest that patients receiving salsalate are at lower
risk for developing significant gastropathy than those treated with naproxen. The
relative benefit-to-risk ratio of salsalate indicates that this drug should be
considered as a significant alternative NSAID therapy.





An endoscopic comparison of the gastroduodenal injury seen with salsalate and
naproxen.



Forty endoscopically normal healthy subjects were randomized to receive either
BID salsalate (3500 mg/day) or BID naproxen (750 mg/day) for 14 days followed by 
repeat endoscopic examination. Gastroduodenal lesions were found in 55% (11/20)
of the subjects taking naproxen, and 10% (2/20) of those taking salsalate (p =
the subjects taking salsalate were noted to have severe gastric injury (p =
gastrointestinal system adverse experiences. Overall, 95% (19/20) of subjects
taking salsalate reported at least 1 adverse experience compared with 60% (12/20)
of those taking naproxen (p = 0.02). This was due primarily to the higher number 
of subjects taking salsalate reporting reversible tinnitus or hearing loss. There
was no significant treatment difference in adverse experiences reported for any
other organ system. The results of our study support previous observations in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis that salsalate produces less gastroduodenal
mucosal toxicity than the widely used antiinflammatory agent, naproxen.





Salsalate alters thyroid function test results.







Metal complexes of antiinflammatory drugs. Part VII: Salsalate complex of
copper(II).



The preparation and properties of the Cu(II) complex Cu(SAS)2.H2O are reported
for the antiinflammatory drug Salsalate (SAS). The diffuse reflectance spectra
and magnetic moments are consistent with a dinuclear structure as found for
[Cu(aspirinate)2(H2O)]2. The Cu(II) complex exhibits an increased superoxide
dismutase activity compared with the parent drug molecule in the nitroblue
tetrazolium assay.





Salsalate in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: a double-blind clinical and
gastroscopic trial versus piroxicam. II. Endoscopic evaluation.



A double-blind, double-dummy controlled study to compare the clinical efficacy
and gastric tolerability of salsalate and piroxicam in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis was performed. A total of 23 patients were treated with 1.5 
g salsalate twice daily and 20 with 20 mg piroxicam (after the evening meal) for 
treatment; only patients who presented a normal baseline gastroscopy were
admitted to the trial. At the end of the planned treatment period, a
statistically significant improvement of all clinical variables was observed in
both treatment groups, the difference between the two drugs not being
statistically significant. Five of 20 (25%) piroxicam treated patients and only
No relationship was found between dyspeptic symptoms and endoscopic lesions. The 
results show that salsalate and piroxicam have equal efficacy in relieving
arthritic symptoms, but salsalate causes fewer gastric lesions.




Salsalate in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: a double-blind clinical and
gastroscopic trial versus piroxicam. I. Clinical trial.



A double-blind, double-dummy controlled study to compare the clinical efficacy
and gastric tolerability of salsalate and piroxicam in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis was performed. Twenty-three patients were treated with 1.5 g
salsalate twice daily and 20 with 20 mg piroxicam (taken after the evening meal) 
for a period of 4 weeks. Patients were submitted to gastroscopy at the start and 
end of treatment; only patients who presented a normal baseline gastroscopy were 
admitted to the trial. At the end of the planned treatment period, a
statistically significant improvement of all clinical variables was observed in
both treatment groups, the difference between the two drugs not being
statistically significant. Seven (37%) patients treated with salsalate complained
of tinnitus. The results show that salsalate and piroxicam have equal efficacy in
relieving the symptoms of arthritis.




Does the acetyl group of aspirin contribute to the antiinflammatory efficacy of
salicylic acid in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis? The Multicenter
Salsalate/Aspirin Comparison Study Group.



In a multicenter, double blind, parallel group study, 233 patients with classical
or definite rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were randomized to 12 weeks of either
salsalate (salicylsalicylic acid, nonacetylated salicylate) or aspirin following 
disease flare. One hundred-fifty patients completed, 83 taking salsalate and 67
taking aspirin. Patients received initial doses of 3 g/day of salsalate or 3.6
g/day of aspirin. Doses were adjusted during the first 5 weeks for efficacy and
tolerance. Both treatments were equally effective as measured by all the usual
variables, but there was a higher incidence of severe gastrointestinal problems
among patients taking aspirin. Thus, this study demonstrated that the acetyl
group of aspirin does not enhance the antiinflammatory efficacy of salicylic acid
in RA.





Salicylsalicylic acid causes less gastroduodenal mucosal damage than
enteric-coated aspirin. An endoscopic comparison.



The gastroduodenal mucosal damage caused by aspirin and nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs is a common clinical problem. We compared two medications 
designed to diminish mucosal damage: enteric-coated aspirin and salicylsalicylic 
acid (salsalate). Ten healthy volunteers were randomized to receive either 1.5 g 
salsalate twice a day or 650 mg enteric-coated aspirin four times a day for six
days and were then crossed over to the other drug after a one-week
medication-free period. Endoscopic inspection of gastroduodenal mucosa was
performed at entry and again after six days of drug therapy for each medicine.
Mean serum salicylate concentrations taken before the morning drug dose were 11.2
mg/dl for enteric-coated aspirin and 18.1 mg/dl for salsalate. Only one of 10
subjects receiving salsalate developed mild (grade 1) mucosal damage while six of
causes less gastroduodenal mucosal damage than enteric-coated aspirin.





Salsalate exacerbation of chronic renal insufficiency. Relation to inhibition of 
prostaglandin synthesis.



Nonacetylated salicylates have not been reported to cause the hemodynamically
mediated acute renal failure associated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
therapy. A 73-year-old woman with a creatinine clearance of 0.33 mL/s (20
mL/min), hypertension, and arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease developed
reversible renal insufficiency when her dose of salsalate was increased to 4.5
g/d (serum salicylate concentration, 2.22 mmol/L [30.7 mg/dL]). Under close
observation the patient was re-treated with lower doses of salsalate while renal 
function and the urinary excretions of prostaglandins were monitored. The
excretion of prostaglandin E2 decreased abruptly while the excretion of
was increased. Renal function appeared to decline in parallel with the decrease
in 6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha and recovered rapidly after discontinuation of
salsalate therapy. Nonacetylated salicylates can cause a hemodynamically mediated
acute renal failure in patients at risk for this nephropathy.





Salsalate and minimal-change nephrotic syndrome.







[Kinetic study of the hydrolysis of salicylsalicylic acid in the presence of
stabilizers].







Duodenal ulcers associated with salsalate therapy.







Salsalate kinetics in patients with chronic renal failure undergoing
hemodialysis.



A 1500 mg dose of salsalate (SSA) was given to five patients undergoing chronic
hemodialysis on an interdialytic day and again before dialysis. Compared with
control subjects, patients undergoing dialysis had a lower peak plasma SSA level 
(17 +/- 3 vs. 45 +/- 2 micrograms/ml; P less than 0.01) that occurred slightly
later. In contrast, plasma salicylic acid (SA), the active SSA metabolite, had a 
similar but later peak level that remained substantially higher. Therefore, the
AUC for SA was increased by 50% and the SA t1/2 was prolonged in the patients
receiving dialysis (8.1 +/- 0.7 vs 3.8 +/- 0.2 hours; P less than 0.01). During a
single treatment, dialysis clearance reduced plasma SA levels, removed 18% of
total body SA, and returned the SA t1/2 to nearly normal. Because the elimination
of SA is impaired in patients undergoing dialysis, the interdialytic SSA dosage
should be reduced. Hemodialysis improves SA kinetics and may be followed by a
normal SSA replacement dose. However, periodic monitoring of plasma SA levels is 
recommended when SSA dosing is begun in patients receiving dialysis.





Hydrolysis of acetylsalicylsalicylic acid and salicylsalicylic acid in aqueous
solution.



Effects of salsalate (nonacetylated salicylate) and aspirin on serum
prostaglandins in humans.


Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), thromboxane B2 (TXB2), and salicylic acid were measured 
in blood samples from 10 healthy men after administration of antiinflammatory
doses of aspirin (3.9 g/day) or salsalate (3.0 g/day). Each medication was given 
for 3 days, followed by an observation period of 13 days. Plasma salicylate
concentrations were slightly, but generally insignificantly, higher during
aspirin dosing, although both drugs produced salicylic acid levels in the
antiinflammatory range. Serum levels of PGE2 and TXB2, which reflected synthesis 
of cyclo-oxygenase products by platelets, were minimally affected by salsalate
but profoundly suppressed by aspirin. When medication was discontinued, the
effects of salsalate on serum PGE2 and TXB2 were readily reversible within 36 h, 
whereas the recovery from aspirin was still incomplete after 13 days of
observation. These results indicate that the two orally administered salicylates 
have differential effects on prostaglandin synthesis in platelets and may also
differ in their therapeutic and adverse effects.





Metabolism of salsalate in normal subjects.



The metabolism of salsalate (I) was characterized in two normal volunteers. The
drug was almost completely absorbed and was excreted primarily in the urine; only
approximately 1% of the total dose was found in the stools. Although I is a
salicylate derivative, which on hydrolysis yields two molecules of salicylic acid
(II), approximately 7-10% of the dose was not hydrolyzed to salicylic acid and
appeared in the urine either as unchanged drug or glucuronide conjugates. Thus,
the incomplete availability of salicylate from salsalate that has been previously
reported may not be due to incomplete absorption of the drug but to incomplete
hydrolysis to salicylic acid.





Salsalate for arthritis: a clinical evaluation.



In an open-label trial, 182 patients with common forms of arthritis were treated 
with 3 gm of salsalate daily (two 750-mg tablets twice daily) for 15 days. Before
entering the study, these patients had received a wide variety of antiarthritic
medications. Five indices of disease severity (pain, stiffness, joint swelling,
limitation of motion, and disability) were evaluated before and after salsalate
therapy, the incidence of side effects was tabulated before and after treatment, 
and patient compliance with the salsalate regimen was assessed. A reduction in
disease symptoms was noted in 79% of the treated patients. Median improvement,
measured on a summary index, was 47%. The incidence of side effects experienced
with previous therapy was reduced by 65% during salsalate administration. Patient
compliance with the regimen was greater than 95%. The findings show salsalate to 
be effective and safe in ameliorating the symptoms of arthritic disease. The
convenient twice-daily dosage regimen makes this drug particularly suitable for
chronic use.





Availability of salicylate from salsalate and aspirin.



Salicylate availability from salsalate (SSA) and aspirin (ASA) was examined in
six rheumatoid arthritis patients in a multiple-dose double-blind crossover
study. Doses contained equimolar amounts of salicylic acid. After initial ASA
treatment to achieve therapeutic salicylate levels (150 to 300 micrograms/ml) the
patients received equimolar doses of SSA or ASA. When steady state was achieved
patients were hospitalized, and blood and urine specimens were obtained during
three dosing intervals and during the washout period that followed. Thereafter,
patients were placed on the alternate medication for at least a week and the
in-hospital pattern was repeated. Despite insignificant differences in absorption
of the formulations, as measured by urinary salicylate recovery, the plasma
salicylic acid AUC was lower after SSA. Evidence indicates that this apparent
lower availability of salicylate from SSA is due to incomplete hydrolysis to
salicylic acid, the unhydrolyzed SSA being excreted mainly as glucuronide
conjugates.





Effect of food on absorption of salicylate from salsalate capsules.







Absorption, biotransformation, and pharmacokinetics of salicylsalicylic acid in
humans.



The absorption, biotransformation, and pharmacokinetics of the antiinflammatory
drug salicylsalicylic acid (SSA) were studied. Healthy adult males received 1000 
mg SSA and 1300 mg aspirin according to a crossover design either as a single
oral dose (12 subjects) or three times a day for five days (4 subjects). A newly 
developed, high-pressure liquid chromatographic assay permitted selective, direct
measurement of SSA in the presence of high concentrations of salicylic acid, one 
of its metabolites. Following a single dose, SSA was promptly absorbed (mean time
to peak level 1.5 hour) and was eliminated from plasma with a mean half-life of
did not accumulate in the plasma during multiple dosing. Plasma levels of
salicylic acid following single and multiple doses of SSA indicate that SSA is
extensively hydrolyzed to salicylic acid in the body. The slightly lower levels
of salicylic acid after SSA than after aspirin may reflect direct
biotransformation of some of the SSA to an SSA conjugate, without hydrolysis to
salicylic acid.





Comparison of serum salicylate levels and gastro-intestinal blood loss between
salsalate (Disalcid)and other forms of salicylates.



In a first stage the effect of a single dose of 3 g of salsalate on serum
salicylate level was compared with a single intake of 3 g of soluble or
enteric-coated acetylsalicylates in 12 healthy subjects. Salsalate seems to
resorb faster than the enteric-coated forms but more slowly than the soluble
forms of acetylsalicylate. However, in comparison with these latter forms,
salsalate activity is more protracted. In the second part of the study, 42
patients were admitted to a trial in which 3 to 5 g of salsalate was given daily 
and in which serum salicylate levels and blood loss in stools were measured using
the method of labelling red blood cells with Cr51. The ideal dosage to obtain a
serum salicylate level of 20 mg/100 ml seems to lie between 3 and 4 g of
salsalate a day. Salsalate caused abnormal gastro-intestinal blood loss in only 2
of the 42 patients studied, which is significantly fewer compared with the
soluble, intravenous or enteric-coated forms of acetylsalicylates.





High-pressure liquid chromatographic determination of salicylsalicylic acid,
aspirin, and salicylic acid in human plasma and urine.



A high-pressure liquid chromatographic method was developed for the separation
and quantitation of salicylsalicylic acid (I), aspirin (II), and salicylic acid
(III) in human plasma and urine. The method for plasma involves the selective
extraction of I--III and an internal standard, alpha-phenylcinnamic acid, into
methylene chloride from acidified plasma, followed by evaporation of the organic 
phase and dissolution of the residue in methanol. A 25-microliter aliquot is
analyzed on a reversed-phase column with UV detection. Urine is treated similarly
with hexane as the extracting solvent. If 300 nm is used as the monitoring
wavelength, the assays of I and III are linear over the concentration range of
wavelength, II can be quantitated along with I and III; however, detector
sensitivities of I and III are two to three times greater at 300 nm. The accuracy
and precision of the methods for I--III are adequate for clinical pharmacokinetic
studies. Following therapeutic doses of I in humans, the method was applied
successfully to the determination of I and III in plasma and urine.





Lack of platelet effect with the aspirin analog, salsalate.



Platelet function as determined by platelet aggregation and the release reaction 
was found to be normal in 8 patients receiving a nonacetylated analog of aspirin,
salsalate, while all 5 aspirin controls had abnormal platelet function. Mean
bleeding time in patients taking salsalate was less than that in aspirin
controls. This study demonstrates that salsalate, which has anti-inflammatory
activity and reduces prostaglandin synthesis, does not interfere with normal
platelet function.





Salsalate: its role in the management of rheumatic disease.


Our present array of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) provides many 
more avenues for the long-term management of rheumatic disease. Their clinical
efficacy notwithstanding, these drugs possess significant iatrogenic potential.
These risks are typified by aspirin side effects, basically gastrointestinal,
hematologic, and thrombopathic. Most of the NSAIDs share these liabilities.
However, there is now wider appreciation of recent findings that nonacetylated
salicylates, particularly salsalate, provide the benefits of aspirin and other
NSAIDs but not their dangers. Salsalate is a prototypic drug of this class; it is
reviewed in detail with appropriate comment concerning its present and potential 
clinical contributions to antirheumatic therapy.





Measurement of salicylsalicylic acid and salicylic acid in plasma by high
pressure liquid chromatography.



Salicylsalicylic acid (SS) and salicylic acid (SA) both appear in plasma after
the oral ingestion of the former. They can be estimated in the presence of each
other after extraction into dichloromethane using high pressure liquid
chromatography. SS is unstable in plasma, being converted to SA in vitro.
Conversion can be prevented by using ethylene diaminetetraacetic (EDTA) as an
anticoagulant and carrying out the extraction in the cold. An aliquot of the
extract is dried and dissolved in methanol. Weak solutions of SS in methanol are 
unstable at room temperature. Methanolysis can be prevented by the addition of
dilute hydrochloric acid. By adding phenylbutazone to the plasma as an internal
standard, variations in extraction and sample application are nullified. Quality 
control is achieved by concurrent extraction of two different plasma standards
containing SS and SA in known amounts. About 40 ng of SS and SA can be detected; 
reproducibility at 200 ng and above is better than 6.5 percent.





Isolation of salicylsalicylic acid, acetylsalicylsalicylic acid, and
acetylsalicylic anhydride from aspirin tablets by extraction and high-pressure
liquid chromatography.



Aspirin and four salicylate impurities of aspirin (salicylic acid,
acetylsalicylsalicylic acid, acetylsalicylic anhydride, and salicylsalicylic
acid) were resolved by silica gell TLC and by high-pressure liquid chromatography
(HPLC) on a reversed-phase C18 column. Care was necessary in the choice of a
column because of similar column failed to resolve these five compounds.
Salicylsalicylic acid was isolated from aspirin tablets by extraction followed by
reversed-phase C18 HPLC. The structure of this compound was confirmed by
comparison with an authentic sample of salicylsalicylic acid by HPLC, TLC, IR and
UV spectrophotometry, and mass spectrometry. Two other compounds, acetylsalicylic
anhydride and acetylsalicylsalicylic acid, which had been previously identified
by chromatography as impurities in aspirin, were isolated and further
characterized.





Fecal blood loss and plasma salicylate study of salicylsalicylic acid and
aspirin.



Using a placebo-controlled methodology, 20 healthy volunteers housed in a
clinical research facility for 23 days were studied for fecal blood loss and
plasma salicylate levels after taking salsalate (salicylsalicylic acid) or
aspirin. Daily dosages were 3000 mg salsalate or 3900 mg aspirin. Aspirin
produced statistically significant gastrointestinal blood loss over control
levels and over that produced by salsalate (P less than 0.01). Blood loss with
salsalate was not different than that with placebo. Despite the intentional
disparity of dosages between the two drugs, plasma salicylate levels were not
statistically different. Side effects occurred at about equal frequency with
either drug. Most prominent were headache and nausea. However, concomitant upper 
respiratory infection in 12 subjects rendered interpretation difficult.





Salicylsalicylic acid revisited: a multicentre study.



Twenty-eight medical specialists (internists, rheumatologists) selected 102
primarily arthritic patients for a two-week efficacy and safety field study of
salicylsalicylic acid. Data were gathered on pain, morning stiffness, range of
motion, serum salicylate concentration, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and 
gastro-intestinal bleeding before and after a 15-day drug trial. Results showed a
improvement in pain; the drug itself was well tolerated by 96% of patients.
Response correlations with morning stiffness and range of motion were equivocal. 
Of fifty-four patients examined before and after treatment for intestinal
bleeding, only two (3.7%) had detectable faecal blood loss. Good clinical
response had a statistically significant association with serum drug
concentrations of 13.6 to 13.8 mg%; unsatisfactory response was noted in those
patients with mean serum salicylate levels of 8.6 mg%. ESR decreased or was
unchanged in thirty-five patients with satisfactory clinical response and in
fourteen patients with unsatisfactory response.




The use of salsalate for control of long-term musculo-skeletal pain: an open,
non-comparative assessment.



An open study was carried out in general practice to assess the analgesic
effectiveness, tolerance and side-effects of salsalate when given at a dosage of 
users were treated: they included 16 with active inflammatory disease of
rheumatoid type, 20 with degenerative joint disease, and 27 with other
musculo-skeletal conditions. Three patients were withdrawn during the study
because of gastro-intestinal upset. Assessments, using rating scale scores, were 
made pre-trial and at 2-weekly intervals of joint pain, other musculo-skeletal
pain, and duration of morning stiffness. The results showed that there was marked
improvement in joint pain and morning stiffness, particularly in those patients
with inflammatory joint disease. Improvement in musculo-skeletal discomfort was
less evident. Side-effects were reported on 24 occasions, the most frequent being
dyspepsia. Faecal occult blood tests showed that there were 7 patients with
probable blood loss during treatment, 4 of them, however, had no other clinical
signs or symptoms of gastrointestinal intolerance.


Comparative study of salsalate and aspirin in osteoarthrosis of the hip or knee.


A short-term, double-blind controlled crossover study was carried out in 20
patients with osteoarthrosis of the hip or knee to compare the effectiveness and 
tolerance of salsalate and aspirin. After a 1-week placebo washout period,
patients received either 3 g salsalate per day or 3.6 g soluble aspirin per day
for 2 weeks before being crossed over to the alternative treatment. Paracetamol
was used as a rescue analgesic. The results of clinical assessments of pain,
stiffness and sleep disturbance, using visual analogue scales, showed that
salsalate produced a comparable clinical improvement to that with aspirin, and
similar serum salicylate levels. Salsalate, however, was significantly superior
to aspirin with regard to side-effects and faecal occult blood loss.


Salicylate-induced foetal damage during late pregnancy in mice: a comparison
between sodium salicylate, acetylsalicylic acid and salicylsalicylic acid.



Hydrolysis of salicylsalicylic acid in human blood and plasma: a comparison with 
acetylsalicylic acid.



Absence of gastrointestinal bleeding following administration of salicylsalicylic
acid.



[Gastrointestinal bleeding and salicylates. A comparative study between
acetylsalicylic acid and salicylsalicylic acid].



[Hydrolysis and in vivo elimination of various salicylate derivatives:
salicylsalicylic acid and succinyldisalicylic acid; determination of hemicresis
and protorrhea].

AIx is a surrogate measure of peripheral arterial resistance and is measured by analysis of the pulse wave at the radial artery. The AIx is calculated as the ratio of the pulse pressure at the second systolic peak to that at the first systolic peak. Change is the difference between 6-week AIx from baseline AIx.
Blood samples were collected for measurement of free fatty acids at baseline and 6 weeks after the Intralipid 20% infusion. FFA levels were determined by colorimetric method. Current guidelines identify normal range of FFA level as less than 0.72 mmol/L. Elevated plasma levels of FFA indicate a greater rate of insulin resistance. Change is the difference between 6-week FFA levels from baseline FFA levels.
compare changes in insulin clearance as assessed by the GGIT before and after treatment with salsalate to placebo
Compare changes in insulin sensitivity as assesses by the IST before and after treatment between salsalate and placebo group
Diastolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure in the arteries when the heart is at rest between beats. Current guidelines identify normal diastolic blood pressure as lower than 80 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 8 hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference between 6-week diastolic blood pressure from baseline diastolic blood pressure.
Energy level on a scale of 0 (no energy) to 10 (most energy) reported as ≤ 3. If the subject answers YES to any of the above noted 3 questions, then they are classified as FRAIL.
Flow mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery was measured by ultrasound. This is a measure of endothelial dependent endothelial cell function. Flow mediated dilation is expressed as a percent change from baseline brachial artery diameter to brachial artery diameter after reactive hyperemia. Reactive hyperemia occurred after occluding the brachial artery with a blood pressure cuff for 5 minutes.
For fasting values treatments (placebo and salsalate) and visits (pre and post) were defined as within subject’s factors.
For peak FFA area under the curve (AUC), treatments (placebo and salsalate) and visits (pre and post treatment) were defined as within-subject’s factors.
For peak Glucose, and Glucose area under the curve (AUC), treatments (placebo and salsalate) and visits (pre and post treatment) were defined as within-subject’s factors.
For peak TG, and TG area under the curve (AUC), treatments (placebo and salsalate) and visits (pre and post treatment) were defined as within-subject’s factors.
HbA1c (%, percentage of HbA1c) change from baseline.
HOMA-IR was not calcuated due to potential confounding effect of salicylates to inhibit insulin clearance. Change in C-peptide from Baseline to Week 14 is in the data table below
HOMA-IR was not calcuated due to potential confounding effect of salicylates to inhibit insulin clearance. Change in insulin from Baseline to Week 14 in data table below.
IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, TNF-alpha, and CRP are inflammatory biomarkers. Each was measured by using microsphere-based flow cytometric immunoassay. Change is the difference between 6-week inflammatory biomarkers from baseline inflammatory biomarkers.
“In the past month, on average, have you been feeling unusually tired during the day?” is answered “yes” and indicated as “all of the time” or “most of the time.”
“In the past month, on average, have you felt unusually weak?” is answered “yes” and indicated as “all of the time” or “most of the time.”
Intra-epidermal Nerve Fiber Density (IENFD) was measured at two anatomic locations (thigh and ankle) at baseline and after 12 weeks of treatment with Salsalate. IENFD is expressed as fibers per mm. Means and standard deviations are shown.
LDL-C/HDL-C ratio not calculated
Oxidative stress was measured by using liquid chromatography to collect plasma glutathione and glutathione disulfide. Change is the difference between 6-week plasma glutathione and glutathione disulfide from baseline plasma glutathione and glutathione disulfide.
Participants were admitted to the Clinical Research Units at 06:00–08:00 hours after an overnight fast. Euglycaemic–hyperinsulinaemic clamps were conducted at baseline and at the end of the study. Because salsalate therapy appears to decrease insulin clearance leading to higher circulating insulin levels during the clamp, we reduced the infusion rate of insulin in the active treatment arm by 20% (from 100 to 80 mUm−2 min−1) at the study end. Insulin solutions were prepared by the site pharmacist so that study staff remained blinded to drug assignment. Whole-body insulin sensitivity was estimated from glucose infusion rate (GIR) during last 30 min of insulin infusions.
Please see adverse events module for hyperglycemia.
PWV was measured between the carotid and femoral arteries using the SphygmoCor device. Pressure waveforms at the carotid and femoral arteries were acquired using EKG gating. Velocity (distance per time in milliseconds) was calculated using the foot-to-foot method and the distance between the sites was measured manually.
See adverse event module for details.
see primary outcome
Subjective fatigue/exhaustion: If any of the following three criteria are met, the patient will be classified as frail for fatigue/exhaustion:
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 12 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 16 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 20 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 24 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 4 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at Week 6 from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 12 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at Week 6 from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 16 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at Week 6 from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 20 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at Week 6 from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 24 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at Week 6 from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 4 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure from at Week 6 from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 8 hours during Intralipid infusion.
Systolic blood pressure is the amount of pressure the heart generates when pumping blood through the arteries to the body. Current guidelines identify normal systolic blood pressure as lower than 120 mmHg. Blood pressure was measured in triplicate with a manual cuff prior to and every 4 hours during the 24-hour infusion with subjects in supine position. from Change is the difference in systolic blood pressure at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 8 hours during Intralipid.
The change in endothelium-dependent vascular reactivity will be measured by flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery using a high-resolution vascular ultrasound with a 10-MHz linear array transducer. FMD is expressed as the percentage increase in diameter at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 12 hours during Intralipid infusion.
The change in endothelium-dependent vascular reactivity will be measured by flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery using a high-resolution vascular ultrasound with a 10-MHz linear array transducer. FMD is expressed as the percentage increase in diameter at the baseline visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 24 hours during Intralipid infusion
The change in endothelium-dependent vascular reactivity will be measured by flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery using a high-resolution vascular ultrasound with a 10-MHz linear array transducer. FMD is expressed as the percentage increase in diameter at the Week 6 visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 12 hours during Intralipid infusion.
The change in endothelium-dependent vascular reactivity will be measured by flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery using a high-resolution vascular ultrasound with a 10-MHz linear array transducer. FMD is expressed as the percentage increase in diameter at the Week 6 visit from pre-dosing with Intralipid to 24 hours during Intralipid infusion
The change in frailty for fatigue/ exhaustion is defined as changing from frail at baseline to not frail at month 6 as reported by the subject.
The postprandial glycemia is assessed by the change in the AUC for plasma glucose sampled before and after intervention at time points of 0 (immediately post-feeding) to 480 min.
The postprandial lipemia is assessed by the change in the AUC for plasma Free fatty acids (FFA)sampled before and after intervention at time points of 0min immediately post feeding to 480 min.
The postprandial lipemia is assessed by the change in the AUC for plasma triglycerides sampled before and after intervention at time points 0 (immediately post-feeding)to 480 min.
The pro-atherogenic inflammatory mediators are assessed by the change in fasting values of Interleukin-6 in plasma concentration Pre and Post intervention at -30 min ( fasting).
This aim was proposed for the TINSAL-T2D stage 2 trial and is separately reported.
This Measure is reporting the number of participants with side effects as reported on the Side Effect Checklist used to monitor common medication side effects.
This was an aim proposed for the longer duration study and is reported under TINSAL-T2D stage 2.
To assess the impact of treatment of anemia with oral salsalate will improve 6 minute walk test (6MWT) distance from baseline to 6 months as measured in meters and centimeters.
To assess whether oral salsalate improves serum biomarkers of erythropoiesis by decreasing growth differentiation factor-15 (GDF-15) in UAE subjects. Change in the GDF-15 from prior to study drug to 6 months.
To assess whether oral salsalate improves serum biomarkers of erythropoiesis by increasing erythropoietin (Epo) in UAE subjects. Change in the Epo from prior to study drug to 6 months.
To assess whether oral salsalate reduces C-reactive protein (CRP) in UAE subjects. Change in the CRP from prior to study drug to 6 months.
To assess whether oral salsalate reduces markers of inflammation including IL-6 and Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor1 (TNF-R1) in UAE subjects. Change in the marker from prior to study drug to 6 months.
To compare the change in serum hepcidin levels between treatment groups and whether such a change is proportional to the decline in IL-6 levels. Change in the hepcidin from prior to study drug to 6 months. Positive changes represent increases in hepcidin levels and negative changes represent decreases.
To examine whether there is an association between change in hemoglobin and changes in markers of inflammation from prior to study drug to 6 months. Inflammatory markers to be measured are iL-6, Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha Receptor1 (TNF-R1), and C-reactive protein (CRP) in anemia subjects.Correlation between change in the inflammatory markers and the change in HB from prior to study drug to 6 months.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on change in the frailty as measured by change in grip strength. Subjects squeeze the grip strength machine 3 times with each hand. For the frailty outcome the maximum grip strength from the dominant hand is used. (change from frail at baseline to not frail at 6 months). Grip strength is stratified by gender and BMI. For men with (BMI <= 24 and a grip strength (GS) <= 29) or (BMI 24.1-28 and grip strength <= 30) or (BMI >28 and a grip strength <= 32) were classified as "frail". For women with (BMI <= 23 and a grip strength of <= 17) or (BMI 23.1-26 and a GS <= 17.3) or (BMI 26.1-29 and a GS <= 18) or (BMI > 29 and a GS <= 21) were classified as "frail".The outcome is the number of participants who were classified as “frail” at baseline and changed to “not frail” at 6 months.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on change in the frailty as measured by change in self-reported activity level. Frailty for activity level is classified by subjects responses to 6physical activity questions on the short version of the Minnesota Leisure Time Activity Questionnaire , were related to walking for exercise, moderately strenuous outdoor chores, dancing, bowling, and regular exercise. The Women's Health And Aging Study (WHAS) scoring algorithm was used to define frailty for self-reported activity level. The answers to these questions were used to calculate kilocalories (Kcals) per week, using the WHAS algorithm, which is further satisfied by by gender. For men, Kcals < 128 per week is frail. For women, Kcals < 90 per week is frail. This is a categorical measurement of yes or no. The outcome is the number of participants who were classified as “frail” at baseline and changed to “not frail” at 6 months.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on change in the speed of the 4 meter walk speed. Subjects are asked to walk as fast as they can for 4 meters. Frailty was determined by the subject's speed. (change from frail at baseline to not frail at 6 months). 4 m walking speed is stratified by gender and height. For men, (height of <= 173 cm and a walking speed of <= 0.65 meter/sec) or a (height > 173, <= .76 meter/sec) were classified as "frail". For women, (height of <= 159 cm and a walking speed of <=.65 meter/sec) or (height >159 cm <= 0.76 meter/sec) were classified as "frail".The outcome is the number of participants who were classified as “frail” at baseline and changed to “not frail” at 6 months.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on cognitive outcomes based on Complex attention/executive processing was derived using the z-scores of the following three tests: (1) TMT Part B seconds per completed circle, (2) time score from the CogState One Back Task, and (3) accuracy score from the CogState One Back Task. The composite score for a subject at each time point was defined as the mean of the Z-scores for the three tests at the time point. For each subject, the Z-score for each test at time point was derived by subtracting the overall baseline mean of the test from the subject's score at the time point (accuracy score) or by subtracting the subject's score at the time point from the overall baseline mean of the test (TMT and time score) and then dividing by the overall baseline standard deviation of the test. Positive z-scores indicate a better performance compared to the baseline average. The change in the Z-score from baseline to month 6.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on cognitive outcomes based on Learning and memory was derived using the z-scores of the following three tests: (1) CogState ISL immediate recall score (total score from three learning trials), (2) CogState ISL immediate recall score from the first learning trial, and (3) CogState ISL delayed recall scores. The composite score for a subject at each time point was defined as the mean of the Z-scores for the three tests at the time point. For each subject, the Z-score for each test at time point was derived by subtracting the overall baseline mean of the test from the subject's score at the time point and then dividing by the overall baseline standard deviation of the test. Positive z-scores indicate a better performance compared to the baseline average. The change in the Z-score from baseline to month 6.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on cognitive outcomes based on speed of processing was derived using the z-scores of the following three tests: (1) TMT Part A seconds per completed circle, (2) simple reaction time from the CogState Detection Task, and (3) choice reaction time from the CogState Identification Task. The composite score for a subject at each time point was defined as the mean of the Z-scores for the three tests at the time point. For each subject, the Z-score for each test at time point was derived by subtracting the subject's score at the time point from the overall baseline mean of the test and then dividing by the overall baseline standard deviation of the test. Positive z-scores indicate a better performance compared to the baseline average.The change in the Z-score from baseline to month 6.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on cognitive outcomes based on the Trail Making Test (TMT) Part B as measured by subjects drawing a line from 25 circled numbers to letters in 300 seconds. The change in seconds per completed circle from baseline to month 6.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on self-reported outcomes measures by change in SF36 physical component score. The SF-36 form identifies self-report physical function and global measure of quality of life and is a multi-purpose, short-form health survey consisting of 36 questions. The Physical Component Summary (PCS) is a subscale of the SF-36 that correlates with physical health domains of the SF-36 ( Physical Function, Role-Physical, and Bodily Pain). The change is calculated and compared from baseline to 6 months. The SF-36 PCS score is a norm based sore with a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10 where results above and below 50 are above and below the average, respectively, in the 2009 general US population.
To quantify the impact of anemia treatment by salsalate on self -reported outcomes measures by subjects answering 47 questions for patients with anemia and or fatigue. This test detects self-report functional changes and QoL. Change from baseline to 6 months. Scores range from 0-188 with higher scores indicating better function.
To test whether the administration of oral salsalate to a subset of elderly subjects with unexplained anemia (UAE) and high interleukin (IL-6) levels will improve hemoglobin level

